from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The translation into English of _From India to the Planet Mars_ has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been undertaken in response to the demand created by the widespread and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,increasing interest which is manifesting itself both in Great Britain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the United States in the phenomena exhibited by its heroine—an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interest which marks a new era in the progress of human knowledge.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Twenty—even ten—years ago the phenomena which Prof. Flournoy here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,describes in detail, and of which he offers a keen, skilful,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological analysis, would have met with the sneers of popular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,science and the contempt of obscurantist orthodoxy; the book would have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found few readers.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Times have greatly changed since the Society for Psychical Research was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,founded, eighteen years ago, by a few thoughtful men (included among
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them were those whose names would have conferred honor upon any body
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of men) interested in the investigation of abnormal mental or psychic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In explaining their reasons for organizing that society, its founders
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made the following statement:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“From the recorded testimony of many competent witnesses, past and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present, including observations accurately made by scientific men of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,eminence of various countries, there appears to be, among much illusion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and deception, an important body of remarkable phenomena which are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_prima facie_ inexplicable on any generally recognized hypothesis, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which, if incontestably established, would be of the highest possible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,value.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The organization of this society constituted the first attempt in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world’s history to investigate the phenomena of clairvoyance, automatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,writing and speaking, trance conditions, second sight, apparitions of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persons at the point of death, alleged spirit messages, etc., by a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scientific body formed upon a broad basis.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As was to have been expected, the work and aims of the society were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,met by a storm of derision and ridicule, and by attacks which poured
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in from every quarter, the bitterest of which came from the always too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,numerous class of narrow-minded scientists, whose partisan prejudices,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confining them to a narrow rut, hinder their seeing anything from a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point of view other than that of their preconceived hypotheses, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prevent them from attaining that open-mindedness which is indispensable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to and one of the first requisites of a true scientist in any field of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,investigation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The interest shown to-day in the work of psychical research—among
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the evidences of which may be noted the reception accorded this work
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Prof. Flournoy, which has, within a few months from the date of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its publication, attained its third French edition—demonstrates the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ultimate triumph of the founders of that society in their efforts to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bring the thinking public to a realization of the supreme importance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a systematic scientific study of the mysterious psychic phenomena
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so long neglected by official science, but which are now beginning to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assume their rightful place in the field of study and observation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Men have come to realize that the facts proved by science have not thus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,far been adequate to satisfy the needs of mankind, and many are to-day
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asking whether the scientific investigation of psychic phenomena may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not succeed in proving _the preamble of all religions_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Already science has disclosed the existence of a hidden, subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world within each individual being, and it is the investigation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that part of the individuality of Hélène Smith which our author has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,undertaken in the following pages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The importance of the subject and its intense interest lie in the fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that psychical research hints at a possible solution, by means of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same methods which science has been accustomed to use in the physical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world, of the great problem of man’s future destiny, of an answer to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the question asked by Job four thousand years ago, “If a man die,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shall he live again?” and which has been repeated in vain by every
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generation of men who have since inhabited the earth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While, it is true, the great majority of men are still skeptical as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ability of science ever to solve this problem, it is, however, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fact that a continually increasing number of thoughtful men are coming
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to believe that the hidden subliminal world within us may point to an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unseen but spiritual world without, communication with which, if once
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,established, would furnish us with the solution so ardently longed for.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Such men do not believe that it behooves them to be content with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passivity of pure Agnosticism are not willing that _Ignoramus et
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Ignorabimus_ should be their only creed. They are beginning to search
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for new facts in the domain of the human mind, just as they have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,searched for and found them everywhere else they have looked for them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mr. F. W. H. Myers, the pioneer and leader of the psychical research
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,movement, in an address recently delivered, says: “Starting from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,various stand-points, we endeavor to carry the newer, the intellectual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,virtues into regions where dispassionate tranquillity has seldom yet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been known.... First, we adopt the ancient belief—implied in all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,monotheistic religion, and conspicuously confirmed by the progress
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of modern science—that the world as a whole, spiritual and material
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,together, has in some way a systematic unity: and on this we base
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the novel presumption that there should be a unity of method in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,investigation of all fact. We hold therefore that the attitude, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,habits of mind, the methods by which physical science has grown deep
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and wide, should be applied also to the spiritual world. We endeavor to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,approach the problems of that world by careful collection, scrutiny,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,testing of particular facts; and we account no unexplained fact too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trivial for our attention.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This is just what Prof. Flournoy has endeavored to do in regard to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange phenomena manifested by Mlle. Hélène Smith. No fact has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regarded by him as too trivial to escape his keen, careful scrutiny
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from a psychological point of view.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The first task which the investigators of these obscure mental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena set themselves was, naturally, that of separating and sifting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the real, actually existent facts from the mass of fraud and deception
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in which mercenary charlatans, aided by the easy credulity of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simple-minded, had contrived so completely to bury from sight the true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena that for a long time the intelligent public refused utterly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to believe in the existence of any real phenomena of the kind, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,insisted that everything when fully probed would be found to be mere
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,delusion, the result of trickery and fraud.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Probably no scientific fact since the dawn of modern science has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,required so great a weight of cumulative evidence in its favor to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,establish the reality of its existence in the popular mind than have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the phenomena in question. The task, however, has been accomplished.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Prof. Flournoy’s heroine, although she is a high-minded, honorable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,woman, regarded by all her neighbors and friends as wholly incapable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of conscious fraud, has been subjected to the closest surveillance on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the part of a number of eminent physicians and scientists of Geneva
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for more than five years past, while Mrs. Piper, the famous Boston
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium, has been subjected to an even closer scrutiny by the Society
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for Psychical Research for the past fifteen years. In spite of the fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that this society has announced its willingness to become responsible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for the entire absence of fraud in Mrs. Piper’s case, and of a similar
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,declaration on the part of Prof. Flournoy and his associates in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regard to Mlle. Smith, there still remain a considerable number of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ultra-skeptical persons who persist in asserting that fraud and deceit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are at the bottom of, and account for, all this species of phenomena.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The well-known gentlemen who have investigated these cases have never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been accused of easy credulity in other matters, and have cautiously
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and perseveringly continued, in their endeavor to satisfy skepticism,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to pile Pelion upon Ossa in the way of cumulative proofs of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,genuineness of the phenomena and to safeguard their investigations in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,every possible manner against all possibility of fraud, until they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have finally come to feel that more than sufficient proof has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnished to satisfy any honest, fair-minded, sensible doubt. They
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not feel that they have the right to devote further time to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,question of the genuineness of the facts observed by them—time which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they believe might be better employed in endeavoring to discover the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,laws by which the phenomena are governed. They believe that those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who are not satisfied with the evidence already offered will not be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convinced by any amount of further testimony—that their skepticism is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,invincible. For persons so constituted this book will have no interest;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its perusal will afford them no pleasure.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The endeavor to explain these mysterious phenomena by scientific
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,investigators has resulted in their adoption of one or other of two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypotheses, viz.:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. That the phenomena are the product of and originate in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal consciousness of the medium; or,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. That the phenomena are really of supernormal origin and emanate from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the disincarnate spirits of the dead, who return to earth and take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,temporary possession of the organism of the medium, talking through her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mouth, writing with her hand while she is in a somnambulistic state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The first theory involves the crediting of the subliminal consciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with almost miraculous powers of telepathy, since, on that hypothesis,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is necessary, in order to account for the knowledge possessed by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium, to suppose that her subliminal consciousness is able to roam
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at will throughout the entire universe and read the mind of any being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possessing the information sought for.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All open-minded investigators freely admit that either of the above
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypotheses may be untrue; that very little is known by them as yet in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regard to the nature of the phenomena; that the data are too slight to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,justify more than a provisional hypothesis, which the discovery of new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facts may at any time entirely demolish. But, thus far, the hypotheses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,above given seem to be the only ones which will in any way rationally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,account for the facts: in which case, it is evident that each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individual observer will be influenced in his choice of a hypothesis by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his religious belief, which will greatly affect the point of view from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which he approaches the subject, and also by his natural temperament,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,habits of thought, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Prof. Flournoy states that he has endeavored to keep constantly in mind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and to be guided by two propositions, which he designates respectively
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the “Principle of Hamlet” and the “Principle of La Place,” the former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being, “_All things are possible_,” the latter, “_The weight of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidence ought to be proportioned to the strangeness of the facts_.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Guided by these two principles, Prof. Flournoy has come to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conclusion that Mlle. Smith really possesses the faculty of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telekinesis—the ability to move ponderable objects situated at a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distance, without contact and contrary to known natural laws. On
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, he does not believe the phenomena manifested by her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be of supernormal origin. The various alleged “spirit” messages,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“incarnations,” “gift of tongues,” and all other apparently supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena, in his opinion, spring from Mlle. Smith’s subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness, and he exercises great skill and ingenuity in his effort
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to trace the very wonderful and astonishing manifestations with which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he has had to deal to natural sources.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Whether the individual reader adopts the author’s views and theories,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or finds in others a more natural explanation of the facts narrated by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Prof. Flournoy, he cannot fail to admire the frankness, candor, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entire freedom from prejudice displayed by him. He evinces a true,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,open-minded, scientific spirit, never distorting facts in order to make
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them fit his hypotheses, and freely admitting the possibility of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discovery of new facts at any time, of a nature to compel him to adopt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some other hypothesis than that which he has provisionally assumed to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explain the phenomena.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A word on another subject before the reader goes on to the perusal of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this narrative of strange facts:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One who is interested in Psychical Research, when he has finally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,succeeded in convincing some obstinate skeptic of the genuineness of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the phenomena—when the doubter has at last yielded to the weight of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidence, then, very frequently, the next question, which comes as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a wet blanket to dampen the ardor of the enthusiastic devotee, is:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_Cui bono?_ Admitting the truth of the facts, what useful purpose is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subserved by their study? Science will never succeed in solving the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,problem of man’s future destiny. It is all a waste of time and will end
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in nothing.” And in a review of this very book, which recently appeared
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in one of our leading metropolitan newspapers, the reviewer asks, “What
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will science make of all this?” (referring to the phenomena manifested
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by Mlle. Smith); and then answers his own question by saying, “It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very unlikely that science will ever discover the nature of these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mysterious phenomena or the laws which govern them.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From this conclusion the followers of Psychical Research emphatically
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dissent. It seems passing strange to them that such an opinion should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be held by intelligent men at the present stage of development of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,human knowledge, in view of the mighty discoveries which have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wrested from nature by the laborious process of persevering observation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of seemingly trivial facts. An eighteenth-century writer might with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some show of reason have made a similar observation in regard to Dr.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Franklin and his experiments with kite and key in a thunder-storm.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It would indeed, at that epoch, have seemed unlikely that science
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would succeed in discovering the secret of the electric fluid by such
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,means. But to-day, at the dawn of the twentieth century, with all the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experience of the past to judge from, are not the probabilities all in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,favor of great results to science from repeated experiments by trained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observers, such as Prof. Flournoy, upon cases similar to that of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If the hypothesis that the world as a whole, spiritual and material
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,together, has in some way a systematic unity, be true—and that is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the hypothesis accepted by a majority of thinking men at the present
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time—then the importance of collecting and recording and analyzing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,such facts as those presented to us in the present narrative cannot be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,overestimated.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The scientific demonstration of a future life may be one of the great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,triumphs reserved for the science of the twentieth century to win,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and Hélène Smith and Prof. Flournoy may ultimately appear to have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contributed largely to its accomplishment.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To those who still persist in asking _Cui bono?_ in reference to such
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,work as that which Prof. Flournoy has here so ably performed, I beg
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,leave to quote further from Mr. Myers the following:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “The faith to which Science is sworn is a faith in the uniformity,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the coherence, the intelligibility of, at any rate, the material
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, universe. Science herself is but the practical development of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, mighty postulate. And if any phenomenon on which she chances on her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, onward way seems arbitrary, or incoherent, or unintelligible, she does
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, not therefore suppose that she has come upon an unravelled end in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, texture of things; but rather takes for granted that a rational answer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, to the new problem must somewhere exist—an answer which will be all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the more instructive because it will involve facts of which that first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, question must have failed to take due account.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “This faith in the uniformity of material Nature formulates itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in two great dogmas—for such they are;—the dogma of the Conservation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of Matter and the dogma of the Conservation of Energy. Of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Conservation of Matter, within earthly limits, we are fairly well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, assured; but of the Conservation of Energy the proof is far less
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, complete, simply because Energy is a conception which does not belong
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, to the material world alone. Life is to us the most important of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, all forms of activity—of energy, I would say—except that we cannot
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, transform other energies into Life, nor measure in foot-pounds that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, directive force which has changed the face of the world. Life comes we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, know not whence; it vanishes we know not whither; it is interlocked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, with a moving system vaster than that we know. To grasp the whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of its manifestation, we should have to follow it into an unseen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, world. Yet scientific faith bids us believe that there, too, there is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, continuity; and that the past and the future of that force which we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, discern for a moment are still subject to universal Law.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Out of the long Stone Age our race is awakening into consciousness of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, itself. We stand in the dawn of history. Behind us lies a vast and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, unrecorded waste—the mighty struggle _humanam condere gentem_. Since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the times of that ignorance we have not yet gone far; a few thousand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, years, a few hundred thinkers, have barely started the human mind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, upon the great æons of its onward way. It is not yet the hour to sit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, down in our studies and try to eke out Tradition with Intuition—as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, one might be forced to do in a planet’s senility, by the glimmer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of a fading sun. _Daphni, quid antiquos signorum suspicis ortus?_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, The traditions, the intuitions of our race are themselves in their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, infancy; and before we abandon ourselves to brooding over them let us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, at least first try the upshot of a systematic search for actual facts.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, For what should hinder? If our inquiry lead us first through a jungle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of fraud and folly, need that alarm us? As well might Columbus have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, yielded to the sailors’ panic when he was entangled in the Sargasso
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Sea. If our first clear facts about the Unseen World seem small and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, trivial, should that deter us from the quest? As well might Columbus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, have sailed home again, with America in the offing, on the ground that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, it was not worth while to discover a continent which manifested itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, only by dead logs.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is deeply to be regretted that no appeals have availed to persuade
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith to consent to the publication of her photograph, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connection with Prof. Flournoy’s account of the phenomena manifested
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She shrinks from the publicity which her possession of these strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,powers has thrust upon her. She dislikes extremely the notoriety given
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her mysterious faculties, and refuses to be interviewed concerning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them, or to discuss Prof. Flournoy’s book.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The name Hélène Smith is, as the reader will doubtless guess, merely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a pseudonym. The individuality designated by that name, however, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,held in highest esteem—in veneration even—by a very large circle of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,friends and acquaintances in the city on the shores of Lake Leman, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she has passed her life from infancy, for whose benefit she is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always ready to exercise her mysterious gifts and to give her services
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,freely to such as seek her aid, refusing always to accept any pecuniary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,compensation for her services. Attaching, as she does, a religious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,significance to her powers, she would deem it a sacrilege to traffic in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  DANIEL B. VERMILYE.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, NEW YORK,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _July, 1900_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                     FROM INDIA TO THE PLANET MARS
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                               CHAPTER I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                             INTRODUCTION
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the month of December, 1894, I was invited by M. Aug. Lemaître,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Professor of the College of Geneva, to attend some seances of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,non-professional medium, receiving no compensation for her services,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and of whose extraordinary gifts and apparently supernormal faculties I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had frequently heard.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Having gladly accepted the invitation of my worthy colleague, I found
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the medium in question, whom I shall call Mlle. Hélène Smith, to be a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beautiful woman about thirty years of age, tall, vigorous, of a fresh,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,healthy complexion, with hair and eyes almost black, of an open and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intelligent countenance, which at once invoked sympathy. She evinced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing of the emaciated or tragic aspect which one habitually ascribes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the sibyls of tradition, but wore an air of health, of physical and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mental vigor, very pleasant to behold, and which, by-the-way, is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often encountered in those who are good mediums.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The number of those invited to take part in the seance being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complete, we seated ourselves in a circle, with our hands resting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the traditional round table of spiritistic circles. Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith—who possesses a triple mediumship: visual, auditive, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,typtological[1]—began, in the most natural manner, to describe the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,various apparitions which passed before her eyes in the partially
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,darkened room. Suddenly she stops and listens; she hears a name spoken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her ear, which she repeats to us with astonishment; then brief
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentences, the words of which are spelled out by raps on the table,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explain the meaning of the vision. Speaking for myself alone (there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were three of us to divide the honor of the seance), I was greatly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprised to recognize in scenes which passed before my eyes events
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which had transpired in my own family prior to my birth. Whence could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the medium, whom I had never met before, have derived the knowledge of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,events belonging to a remote past, of a private nature, and utterly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown to any living person?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The astounding powers of Mrs. Piper, the famous Boston medium, whose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wonderful intuition reads the latent memories of her visitors like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an open book, recurred to my mind, and I went out from that seance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with renewed hope of finding myself some day face to face with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“supernormal”—a true and genuine supernormal—telepathy, clairvoyance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritistic manifestations, it matters not by what name it be called,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,provided only that it be wholly out of the ordinary, and that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,succeed in utterly demolishing the entire framework of established
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present-day science.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I was able at this time to obtain general information only concerning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the past of Mlle. Smith, but it was all of a character favorable to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her, and has since been fully confirmed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of modest bearing and an irreproachable moral character, she has for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years earned an honorable living as an employée of a commercial house,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in which her industry, her perseverance, and her high character have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,combined to secure her a very responsible and important position.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Some three years prior to the date of my introduction to her she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had been initiated into a spiritistic group, where her remarkable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychic powers almost immediately manifested themselves; and she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then became a member of various other spiritistic circles. From its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,commencement her mediumship manifested the complex type to which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have already alluded, and from which it has never deviated. Visions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a waking state, accompanied by typtological dictation and auditive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinations, alternately appeared. From the point of view of their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content these messages had generally a bearing on past events usually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown to the persons present, but which were always verified by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,referring to biographical dictionaries or to the traditions of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,families interested. To these phenomena of retrocognition or of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypermnesia were joined occasionally, according to the environment,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moral exhortations, communicated through the table, more frequently in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,poetry than in prose, addressed to the sitters; medical consultations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied by prescriptions generally appropriate; communications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from parents or friends recently deceased; or, finally, revelations as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,piquant as they were unverifiable concerning the _antériorités_ (that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is, the previous existences) of the sitters, almost all of whom, being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,profound believers in spiritism, would not have been at all surprised
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to learn that they were the reincarnations respectively of Coligny, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vergniaud, of the Princess Lamballe, or of other notable personages. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is necessary, finally, to add that all these messages seemed to be more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or less bound up with the mysterious presence of a “spirit” answering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the name of Leopold, who assumed to be the guide and protector of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the medium.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I at once undertook to improve my acquaintance with Hélène Smith. She
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,freely consented to give seances for my benefit, alternating with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,series which she was giving M. Lemaître, and another for the benefit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Prof. Cuendet, vice-president of the Geneva Society (spiritistic)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for Psychic Studies, all of which I was permitted to attend. In this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,way I have been able to be present at the greater part of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances during the past five years. The personal observations that I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have thus been able to make, reinforced by notes on sittings which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was unable to attend, kindly furnished me by MM. Lemaître and Cuendet,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,form the basis of the study which follows; to which must be added,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,however, certain letters of Mlle. Smith, as well as the numerous and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very interesting conversations I have held with her either immediately
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preceding or following her seances, or at her home, where I also have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had the advantage of being able to talk with her mother. Finally,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,various documents and accessory information, which will be cited
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in their respective time and place, have also been of assistance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in enabling me partially to elucidate certain obscure points.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Notwithstanding all these sources of information, however, I am still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very far from being able to disentangle and satisfactorily explain the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complex phenomena which constitute Hélène’s mediumship.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Dating from the period at which I made the acquaintance of Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(_i. e._, from the winter of 1894-95), while most of her spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communications have continued to present the same character as to form
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and content as before, a double and very important modification in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumship has been observed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. As to their psychological form.—While up to that time Hélène had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experienced partial and limited automatisms only—visual, auditive,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,typtomotor hallucinations—compatible with the preservation to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain extent of the waking state, and not involving noticeable loss
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of memory, from that time and with increasing frequency she has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject to an entire loss of consciousness and a failure to retain, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,returning to her normal state, any recollection of what has transpired
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during the seance. In physiological terms, the hemisomnambulism without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,amnesia, which had been her stopping-point up to that time, and which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the sitters mistook for the ordinary waking state, was now transformed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into total somnambulism with consecutive amnesia.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In spiritistic parlance, Mlle. Smith now became completely entranced,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and having formerly been an ordinary visual and auditive medium, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,now advanced to the higher plane of an “incarnating medium.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I fear that this change must in a great measure be attributed to my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,influence, since it followed almost immediately upon my introduction
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to Hélène’s seances. Or, even if the total somnambulism would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have inevitably been eventually developed by virtue of an organic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,predisposition and of a tendency favorable to hypnoid states, it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nevertheless probable that I aided in hastening its appearance by my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presence as well as by a few experiments which I permitted myself to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make upon Hélène.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As is well known, mediums are usually surrounded by a halo of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,veneration, which prevents any one from touching them during their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trances. The idea would never occur to any ordinary frequenter of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritistic circles to endeavor to ascertain the condition of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium’s sensory and motor functions by feeling her hands, pinching
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the flesh, or pricking the skin with a pin. Silence and immobility are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the strict rule, in order not to hinder the spontaneous production
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the phenomena, and a few questions or brief observations on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,receipt of a message is all that is permissible by way of conversation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and no one therefore would, under ordinary circumstances, dare to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attempt any manipulation of the medium. Mlle. Smith had always been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surrounded by this respectful consideration, and during the first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three seances I conformed myself strictly to the passive and purely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contemplative attitude of the other sitters. But at the fourth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitting my discretion vanished. I could not resist a strong desire to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ascertain the physiological condition of the charming seeress, and I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made some vigorous elementary experiments upon her hands, which lay
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,temptingly spread out opposite me on the table. These experiments,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which I renewed and followed up at the succeeding seance (February
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3, 1895), demonstrated that there is present in Mlle. Smith, _during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her visions_, a large and varied assortment of sensory and motor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disturbances which had hitherto escaped the notice of the sitters,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and which are thoroughly identical with those that may be observed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in cases of hysteria (where they are more permanent), and those that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,may be momentarily produced in hypnotic subjects by suggestion. This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was not at all astonishing, and was to have been expected. But one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consequence, which I had not foreseen, did occur when, four days after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my second experimental seance, Mlle. Smith fell completely asleep for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first time at a sitting with M. Cuendet (February 7th), at which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I was not present. The sitters were somewhat frightened, and, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trying to awaken her, discovered the rigidity of her arms, which were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,considerably contractured. Leopold however, communicating by means of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table upon which she was leaning, fully reassured them, and gave
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them to understand that such sleep was not at all prejudicial to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium. After assuming various attitudes and indulging in some amusing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mimicry, Mlle. Smith awoke in excellent spirits, retaining as a last
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollection of her dream that of a kiss which Leopold had imprinted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon her forehead.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From that day on somnambulisms were the rule with Hélène, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances at which she did not fall completely asleep for at least a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,few moments formed rare exceptions to the course of events during the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,next four years. It is a great deprivation for Mlle. Smith that these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slumbers ordinarily leave her no memory upon her awakening of what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has transpired in her trance, and she longs for the seances of former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,times when the visions unfolded themselves before her eyes, furnishing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her with a pleasing spectacle which was always unexpected, and which,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,continually being renewed, caused the seances to be to her a source
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of great delight. For the sitters, on the other hand, these scenes of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism and incarnation, together with the various physiological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena of catalepsy, lethargy, contractures, etc., which accompanied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them, added great variety and additional interest to Hélène Smith’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarkable and instructive triple mediumship.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The greater sometimes implies the less: simultaneously with the access
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of complete somnambulism came new forms and innumerable shades of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hemisomnambulism. The triple form of automatism which distinguished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first years of Mlle. Smith’s spiritistic experiences has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wonderfully developed since 1895, and it would now be difficult to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,name any principal forms of psychic mediumship of which she has not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnished curious specimens. I shall have occasion to cite several
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of them in the course of this work. Hélène constitutes the most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarkable medium I have ever met, and very nearly approaches the ideal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of what might be called the polymorphous, or multiform, medium, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contradistinction to the uniform mediums, whose faculties only concern
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves with one kind of automatism.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. A modification analogous to that which took place in the psychologic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,form of the messages consisting of a marked improvement in their depth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and importance, was noticeable simultaneously in their content.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alongside of the unimportant communications, complete at one sitting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and independent one of another, which filled up a large part of each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène’s seances and in no wise differentiated her faculties from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those of the majority of mediums, she manifested from the beginning a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marked tendency to a superior systematization and a more lofty chain of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions; communications were often continued through several seances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and reached their conclusion only at the end of several weeks. But
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the period at which I made the acquaintance of Mlle. Smith this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tendency towards unity began to assert itself still more strongly.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Several long somnambulistic dreams began to appear and to develop, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,events of which continued to be unfolded through months, even years,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and indeed still continue; a species of romance of the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagination analogous to those “continued stories” which so many of our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,race tell themselves in their moments of _far niente_, or at times when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their routine occupations offer only slight obstacles to day-dreaming,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and of which they themselves are generally the heroes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith has no fewer than three distinct somnambulistic romances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and if to these is added the existence of that secondary personality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to which I have already alluded, and which reveals itself under the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,name of Leopold, we find ourselves in the presence of four subconscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,creations of vast extent, which have been evolved on parallel lines for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several years, and which manifest themselves in irregular alternation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during the course of different seances, or often even in the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All of these have undoubtedly a common origin in Hélène’s subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness; but in practice, at least, and to all appearance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these imaginative constructions present a relative independence and a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,diversity of content sufficiently great to render it necessary to study
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them separately. I shall confine myself at present to a general view of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Two of these romances are connected with the spiritistic idea of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,previous existences. It has, indeed, been revealed that Hélène Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has already lived twice before on this globe. Five hundred years ago
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she was the daughter of an Arab sheik, and became, under the name of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Simandini, the favorite wife of a Hindoo prince named Sivrouka Nayaka,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who reigned over Kanara, and built in the year 1401 the fortress of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Tchandraguiri. In the last century she reappeared in the person of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,illustrious and unfortunate Marie Antoinette. Again reincarnated, as a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,punishment for her sins and the perfecting of her character, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,humble circumstances of Hélène Smith, she in certain somnambulistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,states recovers the memory of her glorious avatars of old, and becomes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again for the moment Hindoo princess or queen of France.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I will designate under the names of “Hindoo” or “Oriental” cycle and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Royal” cycle the whole of the automatic manifestations relative to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these two previous existences. I shall call the third romance the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Martian” cycle, in which Mlle. Smith, by virtue of the mediumistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculties, which are the appanage and the consolation of her present
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life, has been able to enter into relation with the people and affairs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the planet Mars, and to unveil their mysteries to us. It is in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this astronomical somnambulism that the phenomenon of glossolalia[2]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appears, which consists of the fabrication and the use of an unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language, and which is one of the principal objects of this study; we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shall see, however, that analogous facts are likewise presented in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo cycle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The personality of Leopold maintains very complex relations with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preceding creations. On the one hand, it is very closely connected with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Royal cycle, owing to the fact that the name of Leopold is only a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pseudonym under which is concealed the illustrious Cagliostro, who, it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appears, was madly infatuated with Queen Marie Antoinette, and who now,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discarnate and floating in space, has constituted himself the guardian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,angel in some respects of Mlle. Smith, in whom after a long search he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has again found the august object of his unhappy passion of a century
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ago.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On the other hand, this rôle of protector and spiritual guide which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he assumes towards Hélène confers upon him a privileged place in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulisms. He is more or less mixed up in the greater part of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them; assists at them, watches over them, and perhaps in a measure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,directs them. He also occasionally appears in the midst of a Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or a Martian scene, delivering his message by certain characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,movements of the hand.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To sum up: sometimes revealing himself by raps upon the table, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taps of a finger, or by automatic writing; sometimes incarnating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself completely and speaking by the mouth of Mlle. Smith while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entranced—Leopold fulfils in these seances the multiple and varied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,functions of spirit-guide, giving good advice relative to the manner
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of acting towards the medium; of stage-manager hidden behind the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scenes watching the performance and ready at any time to intervene;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of benevolently disposed interpreter willing to furnish explanations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of all that is obscure; of censor of morals sharply reprimanding the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters when he deems it necessary; of sympathetic physician prompt at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,diagnosis and well versed in the pharmacopœia, etc. He also appears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under his own name of Cagliostro to the somnambulistic gaze of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resuscitated Marie Antoinette and answers her questions by means of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,auditive hallucinations. Nor is this all: to make our summary complete,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is necessary also to investigate the personal connection of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith with her invisible protector. She often invokes and questions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold at her own convenience, and while he remains sometimes for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weeks without giving any sign of life, he at other times readily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,responds to her by means of voices or visions which surprise her while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fully awake in the course of her daily duties, and in which he lavishes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon her in turn material or moral advice, useful information, or the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,encouragement and consolation of which she has need.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Although I have accused myself of perhaps having had much to do with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the transformation of Hélène’s hemisomnambulism into complete trances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I believe myself, however, altogether innocent of the origin, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,therefore of the subsequent development, of the great subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,creations of which I have spoken. The first, that of Leopold, is of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very early date, even going back probably, as we shall see, prior to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith’s initiation into spiritism. As to the three cycles, they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,did not, it is true, commence to display their full amplitude until
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after I had made Hélène’s acquaintance; and since they start from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time when she first became subject to veritable trances, it would seem
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as though that supreme form of automatism is the only one capable of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,allowing the full expansion of productions so complex, and the only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological _container_ appropriate and adequate to such a _content_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But the first appearance of all three was clearly prior to my presence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the seances. The Hindoo dream, where I shall be found playing a rôle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which I did not seek, evidently began (October 16, 1894) eight weeks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before my admission to Mlle. Smith’s seances. The Martian romance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which dates from the same period, is closely connected, as I shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also show, with an involuntary suggestion of M. Lemaître, who made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the acquaintance of Hélène in the spring of 1894, nine months before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my introduction to her. The Royal cycle, finally, had been roughly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,outlined at seances held at the home of M. Cuendet, in December, 1893.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nevertheless, I repeat, only since 1895 have the exuberant growth and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,magnificent flowering of that subliminal vegetation taken place under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the stimulating and provocative influence, albeit wholly unintentional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and altogether unsuspected at the time, of the varied environments of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith’s seances.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As far as the indiscreet revelations in regard to my own family,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which so much astonished me at my first meeting with Mlle. Smith, are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerned, as well as the innumerable extraordinary facts of the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kind with which her mediumship abounds, and to which she owes her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immense reputation in spiritistic circles, it will suffice to return in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the closing chapters of this book.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER II
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                  CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH OF MLLE. SMITH
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The psychological history of Mlle. Smith and her automatisms is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,naturally divided into two separate periods by the important fact of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her initiation into spiritism at the beginning of 1892. Before that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time, not suspecting the possibility of voluntary communication with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the world of disincarnate spirits, she naturally manifested nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more than a few spontaneous phenomena, the first flutterings of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumistic faculties which still lay dormant, the exact nature
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and progress of which it would be interesting to know in detail;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unfortunately, in the absence of written documents concerning that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pre-spiritistic period, we are confined to the statements of Hélène and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her parents in regard to it, and the untrustworthiness of the memory in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connection with events of a remote past is only too well known.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The spiritistic period, on the contrary, extending over the last seven
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years, and infinitely more fertile in artificially promoted (_e.g._,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances) as well as in spontaneous manifestations, is much better
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,known to us; but in order to comprehend it intelligently, it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,necessary first to pass in review the few facts which we have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to gather relating to the pre-spiritistic period—that is to say,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the childhood and youth of Mlle. Smith. That will be the subject of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this chapter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith has lived in Geneva since her infancy. After attending
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,school, she entered as an apprentice, at the age of fifteen, a large
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,commercial house, where, as I have already stated, she still remains,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and where, little by little, she has risen to a very responsible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,position. Her father, a merchant, was a Hungarian, and possessed a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarkable facility for languages, which is of interest to us in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presence of the phenomena of glossolalia, a subject which will be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discussed hereafter. Her mother is a Genevese. Both enjoyed excellent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,health and attained a venerable old age. Hélène had a younger sister
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who died in early childhood, and two brothers older than herself, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are now fathers of families and established abroad, where they have had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,successful business careers.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I am not aware that M. Smith, who was a man of positive character, ever
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,displayed any phenomena of automatisms. Mme. Smith, however, as well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as her grandmother, has experienced several thoroughly characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena of that kind, and one, at least, of Hélène’s brothers, it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appears, could easily have become a good medium. This is another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,instance of the distinctly hereditary tendency of mediumistic faculties.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Smith, a man of active and enterprising character, died quite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suddenly, probably of an embolism, at the age of seventy-five years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He had left Hungary in his youth, and finally established himself at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Geneva, after having travelled extensively in Italy and Algiers, where
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he remained for several years. He spoke fluently Hungarian, German,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French, Italian, and Spanish, understood English fairly well, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also knew Latin and a little Greek. It would seem that his daughter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has inherited these linguistic aptitudes, but only in a latent and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal manner, for she has always detested the study of languages,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and rebelled against learning German, in which she took lessons for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mme. Smith, who is a kind-hearted woman, with much good, practical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sense, is sixty-seven years of age. Neither she nor her husband was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ever a nervous or psychopathic subject, but both showed a marked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tendency to broncho-pulmonary affections of a somewhat alarming type.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mme. Smith has, besides, suffered frequently from rheumatism. Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not appear to have inherited these tendencies; she has always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enjoyed robust health, and has not even had the slight diseases usually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incidental to childhood.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Although both M. and Mme. Smith were Protestants, through a chain of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiar circumstances their daughter was baptized a Catholic shortly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after her birth, her name being inscribed some months later on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,register of the Protestant church of Geneva. The memory of this unusual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,baptism has certainly not been lost by Hélène’s subliminal imagination,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and has duly contributed to the hypothesis of a mysterious origin. Of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the years of childhood I know nothing specially interesting. At the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intermediate school, at which she passed only a year, and where I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consulted the records of her class, she was not distinguished either
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for good or ill from the point of view of deportment, but she certainly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,did not reveal the full measure of her intelligence, since she failed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to pass the examinations at the end of the year, a fact which decided
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her entrance upon an apprenticeship. On the other hand, the worthy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pastor who gave her religious instruction somewhat later, and who has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never lost sight of her since, has furnished me with most eulogistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,testimonials as to her character; he remembers her as a young girl of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,serious disposition, intelligent, thoughtful, faithful in the discharge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her duties, and devoted to her family.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Smith never showed the least trace of mediumistic phenomena; from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having been very indifferent, or even hostile, to spiritism until his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,daughter began to interest herself in it, he finally succumbed to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,influence and became a believer in that doctrine towards the close of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his life. Mme. Smith, on the contrary, has always been predisposed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to it, and has experienced several phenomena of that nature in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,course of her life. At the period of the epidemic of “table-tipping”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which raged in our country about the middle of this century, she too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experimented quite successfully for a while upon the table with her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,friends and acquaintances. Later, she had some sporadic visions. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following is one of the most typical. While her little daughter three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years old was ill, Mme. Smith awoke in the middle of the night and saw
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an angel, of dazzling brightness, standing by the side of the little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bed with its hands stretched out above the child; after some moments
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the apparition gradually dissolved. Mme. Smith awakened her husband and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,told him of the fatal significance which she attached to the vision,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but he, unable to see anything, ridiculed her superstitious fears. As
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a matter of fact, the child died on the following day, to the great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprise of the physician attending her. This is a fine example of true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,maternal presentiment, subconsciously felt and transferring itself into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the normal consciousness by a visual hallucination which borrowed for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its symbolic content an appropriate popular image.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mme. Smith never knew her mother, who died shortly after her birth; but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she recalls and has related to me some characteristic visions of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grandmother, who brought her up; various phenomena connected with one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène’s brothers (hearing of steps in the night, etc.) have proved
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her that one of her sons, at least, is a medium.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène Smith was certainly predisposed, both by heredity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and temperament, to become a medium, as soon as the outward
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opportunity—that is, the suggestions of spiritism—should present itself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is evident, indeed, from her recital of events, that she was more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or less visionary from her infancy. It does not appear, however, that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she ever manifested phenomena capable in themselves of attracting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the attention of her family. I have not been able to discover any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indication whatever of crises or attacks of an abnormal nature, not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,even of sleep-walking. Her automatisms have been always almost entirely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confined to the sensory or mental sphere, and it is only from her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,own narratives that other people have any knowledge of them. They
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assume the double form of reveries more or less conscious, and of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinations properly so called.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. _Reveries._—The habit of falling into reverie, of building castles
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the air, of transporting one’s self into other conditions of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existence, or of telling one’s self stories in which one plays the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chief rôle, is more frequent among women than among men, and in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,childhood and youth than in mature years. This propensity seems to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have always been extremely marked in the case of Mlle. Smith, since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from her school-girl days she has shown herself to be of a sedentary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and domestic temperament, preferring the quiet companionship of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mother to the games of her comrades, and her needle-work to out-door
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recreations. The fragments which have survived in Hélène’s conscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory are all that is known to us of the content of these reveries,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but it suffices, nevertheless, to reveal to us the general tone of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fictions, and to show us that the images suddenly surging up before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her mental vision had a peculiar, often very fantastic, character,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and which enables us to see in them the beginnings of her later great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulistic romances. It is to be noticed also that the designs,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,embroideries, varied artistic works, which were always the favorite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupations of her moments of leisure and in which she excels, were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,almost always, from her infancy, not copies of exterior models, but the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,products of her own invention, marked with the bizarre and original
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stamp of her internal images. Moreover, these pieces of work grew under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her fingers with an ease and rapidity that astonished herself. They
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made themselves, as it were.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She was always fond of indulging in day-dreams, and recalls many a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,half-hour passed motionless in an easy-chair, on which occasions she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was accustomed to see all kinds of strange things, but, being of a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reticent nature, she seldom mentioned them to her parents for fear of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not being understood. She used to see highly colored landscapes, a lion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of stone with a mutilated head, fanciful objects on pedestals, etc. She
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not remember the details, but does clearly recollect that they all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bore a close resemblance to her Hindoo and Martian visions of later
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These phantasmagoria also appeared to her in the night. She remembers,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,among other things, to have seen, when about fourteen or fifteen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years old, a bright light thrown against the wall of her room, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then seemed to be filled with strange and unknown beings. She had the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impression of being fully awake, but it suddenly occurred to her that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she must have been dreaming, and it was only then that she comprehended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it was really a “vision” which she had experienced.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2 _Hallucinations._—In the foregoing examples it would be difficult to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,say to exactly which category the psychologic facts belong, especially
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the nocturnal phenomena, and one may hesitate whether to regard them as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simple dreams of a very vivid character, hypnagogic or hypnopompic[3]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions, or as veritable hallucinations. On the other hand, we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,undoubtedly have the right to give the latter designation to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,numerous apparitions which Mlle. Smith has when in full possession of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her senses in the daytime.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One day, for example, as she was playing out-of-doors with a friend,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she saw some one following her, and mentioned the fact to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,companion, who could not see any one. The imaginary individual, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having followed her around a tree for a moment, disappeared, and she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was unable to find him again.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of an entirely different order are the strange characters which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remembers having sometimes involuntarily substituted for French letters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when writing to her friends, which must be regarded as graphomotor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinations. These were undoubtedly the same characters which at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other times appeared to her in visual images.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This was the prelude to the phenomenon so frequently experienced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by her in the last few years, and of which we shall hereafter see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,many examples—namely, automatic writing, mingling with her ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chirography in her waking state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alongside of hallucinations like these, which do not show any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intentional or useful character and are only a capricious and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fortuitous irruption into the normal consciousness, mere dreams or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fancies filling up the subconscious strata, there are also manifested
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in Hélène’s case some hallucinations of a manifest utility, which have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in consequence the sense of messages addressed by the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness of the subject to her normal consciousness, by way of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,warning and protection. It is to be noted that these hallucinations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which might be called teleological, have lately been claimed by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, although he has no recollection of, and does not assert
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself to be the author of, the earlier ones.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following is a curious example: At about the age of seventeen or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,eighteen, Hélène was returning from the country one evening, carrying
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a fine bouquet of flowers. During the last minutes of the journey
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she heard behind her a peculiar cry of a bird, which seemed to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to warn her against some danger, and she hastened her steps without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,looking behind. On her arrival at home the cry followed her into her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,room without her having been able to see the creature from which it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emanated. She went tired to bed, and in the middle of the night awoke
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in great pain, but was unable to cry out. At that moment she felt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself gently lifted, together with the pillow on which she lay, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,if by two friendly hands, which enabled her to recover her voice and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,call her mother, who hastened to comfort her, and carried the flowers,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which were too odorous, out of the room. Leopold, on being interrogated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recently during a somnambulism of Hélène as to this incident, coming
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up again after so many years, has a very clear recollection of it and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives the following explanation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It was not really the cry of a bird, but it was he, Leopold, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caused Hélène to hear a sort of whistle, hoping thereby to attract her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attention to the danger lurking in the bouquet of flowers, in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was a great deal of garden-mint of powerful odor. Unfortunately Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,did not understand, and retained the bouquet in her room. He adds that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his failure to give a more clear and intelligible warning was due to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the fact that it was at that time impossible for him to do so. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whistle which Hélène took for the cry of a bird was all that it was in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his power to utter. It was again he who intervened at the moment of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nocturnal illness by raising her head in order to enable her to call
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for help.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have no reason to doubt the substantial accuracy either of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,account given by Hélène and her mother, or of the explanation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recently furnished by Leopold. The incident belongs to the category
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of well-known cases where a danger of some sort not suspected by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,normal personality, but which is subconsciously known or recognized,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is warded off by a preservative hallucination, either sensory (as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,here—the cry of the bird) or motor (as in the lifting of the body). The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal consciousness is not always able to give a clear message;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the present case, the auditive automatism remained in a state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,elementary hallucination, a simple whistle, without being able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,elevate it to a distinct verbal hallucination. Its general warning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sense, however, was understood by Hélène, thanks to the confused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feeling of danger that she felt at the same time. Moreover, this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confused feeling, which caused her to quicken her steps, it seems to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me, ought not to be considered as the consequence of the whistle she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard, but rather as a parallel phenomenon; the appearance or the odor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the mint she was carrying, while not attracting her conscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attention, nevertheless dimly roused in her an idea of the danger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lurking in the flowers, and that idea in turn affected her clear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness under the double form of a vague emotion of danger and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a verbo-auditive translation which did not go so far as to formulate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself explicitly.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Under circumstances of a nature calculated to cause a strong emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shock, and especially when the psychic sphere which involves the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentiment of modesty is strongly acted upon, Hélène has a visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucination of a man clothed in a long, brown robe, with a white
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cross on his breast, like a monk, who comes to her aid, and accompanies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her in silence as long as the necessity for his presence continues.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This unknown protector, always silent, each time appearing and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disappearing in a sudden and mysterious manner, is no other than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold himself, according to the recent affirmations of the latter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We should naturally expect that Hélène would have had in her youth many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,striking experiences of prevision, marvellous intuition, divination,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc., which are among the most diffuse forms of teleological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatism. Such, however, does not seem to have been the fact;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,neither she nor her mother has recounted to me anything remarkable of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this nature, and they confine themselves to a general affirmation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frequent presentiments, which were subsequently justified as to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persons and events with which they were connected.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All the examples which I have above cited concur in bringing to light
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the strong penchant of Mlle. Smith towards automatism. But from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point of view of their meaning there is a notable difference between
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the teleological phenomena, presentiments or hallucinations of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manifest utility, and those which have none—mere reveries and other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perturbations, which are altogether superfluous, if not actually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,detrimental, to Hélène’s normal personality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are dreams and other automatisms absolutely useless which have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,insinuated themselves without rhyme or reason into Hélène’s normal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life. One does not know how or in what manner to interpret these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena, capricious and fortuitous as they seem to be, and they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remain isolated, inconsiderable facts, without bearing and without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interest, since they cannot be attached to any central principle, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one mother-idea or fundamental emotion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We are, therefore, reduced to certain conjectures, the most reasonable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of which is that these diverse fragments make part of some vast
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subconscious creation, in which all the being of Mlle. Smith, crushed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and bruised by the conditions which the realities of life have imposed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon her, as is more or less the case with each one of us, gave free
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wing to the deep aspirations of its nature and expanded into the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fiction of an existence more brilliant than her own. All that we know
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène’s character, both as a child and as a young girl, shows us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that her dominant emotional note was a sort of instinctive inward
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revolt against the modest environment in which it was her lot to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,born, a profound feeling of dread and opposition, of inexplicable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_malaise_, of bitter antagonism against the whole of her material and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intellectual environment. While showing herself always very devoted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her parents and brothers, she had only feeble natural affinities
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for them. She felt like a stranger in her family and as one away from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,home. She had a feeling of isolation, of abandonment, of exile, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,created a sort of gulf between her and her family. So strong were these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feelings that she actually one day seriously asked her parents if it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was absolutely certain that she was their daughter, or whether it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not possible that the nurse might some day by mistake have brought home
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,another child from the daily walk.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This want of adaptation to her environment, this sort of mysterious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,homesickness for an unknown country, shows itself in a characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manner in the following fragment of narrative, in which Hélène, who has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always attributed great importance to dreams, tells of one in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an isolated house figured. “To me this retired mansion, in which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lived alone, isolated, represents my life, which from my infancy has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been neither happy nor gay. Even while very young I do not remember to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have shared any of the tastes or any of the ideas of the members of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my family. Thus during the whole of my childhood I was left in what I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,call a profound isolation of heart. And in spite of all, in spite of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this complete want of sympathy, I could not make up my mind to marry,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,although I had several opportunities. A voice was always saying, ‘Do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not hurry: the time has not arrived; this is not the destiny for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which you are reserved.’ And I have listened to that voice, which has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absolutely nothing to do with conscience, and I do not regret it, for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,since I have engaged in spiritism I have found myself so surrounded
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with sympathy and friendships that I have somewhat forgotten my sad
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lot.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This quotation speaks volumes in regard to the turn of mind and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotional disposition which ruled Hélène as a little girl. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surely, so to speak, the vulgar story and the common lot of all; many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a child, many a youth, many an unrecognized genius, feel themselves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suffocating in their too narrow environment when the latent energies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of life begin to ferment. But there are differences in kind and in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,degree. With Mlle. Hélène Smith the sentiment of not having been made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for her environment, and of belonging by nature to a higher sphere, was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intense and lasting. Her mother always had the impression that Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was not happy, and wondered that she was so serious, so absorbed, so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wanting in the exuberance of spirits natural to her age. Her father
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her brothers, not comprehending the real reasons for this absence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of gayety, taxed her very unjustly with pride and hauteur, and accused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her sometimes of despising her humble surroundings. There are shades of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feeling which can only be understood when they have been experienced.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène well knew that she really had no contempt for her material and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,social environment, which, on the contrary, inspired her with respect,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but which simply was not congenial to her nature and temperament.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To this fundamental feeling of imprisonment in a too paltry sphere was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,joined, in Hélène’s case, a timid disposition. Darkness, the least
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,noise, the creaking of the furniture, made her tremble; by day, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,person walking behind her, an unexpected movement, the ringing of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the door-bell, gave her the impression that some one wishing to harm
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her had come to seize her and carry her off. On the whole, Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tendency to be startled by everything and nothing constituted with her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a grievous panophobia, a state of fear and insecurity which greatly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strengthened her impression of want of union—of _mésalliance_—with an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment to which she was decidedly superior.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is easy now to see the connection between that depressing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotionalism which was the attribute of Hélène’s childhood and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slightly megalomaniac tone of her later subliminal romances. The idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intrudes itself that, in spite of—or by reason of—their apparent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contrast, these two traits are not independent of each other, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bound by the tie of cause and effect. But this causal connection is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in great danger of being interpreted in a precisely inverse sense by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the empirical psychologist and the metaphysical occultist. The latter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will explain Mlle. Smith’s curious impression of strangeness and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,superiority to the base conditions of her actual existence, by her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,illustrious previous incarnations; the psychologist, on the contrary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will see in that same impression the wholly natural origin of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grandiose somnambulistic personifications. In default of a complete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understanding, always dubious, between these so different points of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,view, of which we shall speak later, it will be advisable to adopt at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,least a provisional _modus vivendi_, based on the party-wall of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,native constitution or individual character of Mlle. Smith. On the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,farther side of that wall, _in eternity_, so to speak, _a parte ante_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which precedes the arrival of Hélène into this life, the occultist
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will have full latitude to imagine such a succession of existences as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it shall please him in order to explain the character she has had from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her infancy. But on this side of the wall—that is to say, within the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,limits of her present life—the psychologist will have the right to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ignore all these prenatal metempsychoses, and taking for his point of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,departure the innate constitution of Hélène, without troubling himself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about anything she may have received by the accidents of heredity or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preserved from her royal pre-existences, he will endeavor to explain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by that same constitution, as it reveals itself in her daily life, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,genesis of her subliminal creations under the action of occasional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exterior influences. The occultist, then, can have the pleasure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of regarding Mlle. Smith’s characteristic trait as a child, that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impression of solitude and wandering about in a world for which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was not made, as _the effect_ of her real past greatnesses, while the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychologist will be permitted to see in it _the cause_ of her future
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dreams of grandeur.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The emotional disposition which I have depicted, and which is one of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the forms under which the maladaptation of the organism, physical and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mental, to the hard conditions of the environment, betrays itself,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seems therefore to me to have been the source and starting-point
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for all the dreamings of Hélène in her childhood. Thence came these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions, always warm, luminous, highly colored, exotic, bizarre; and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these brilliant apparitions, superbly dressed, in which her antipathy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for her insipid and unpleasant surroundings betrays itself, her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weariness of ordinary, commonplace people, her disgust for prosaic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupations, for vulgar and disagreeable things, for the narrow house,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the dirty streets, the cold winters, and the gray sky. Whether these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,images, very diverse, but of the same brilliant quality, were already
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existent in Hélène’s subconscious thought while still a child or a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,young girl, we are unable to say. It is, however, probable that their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,systematization was far from attaining to such a degree of perfection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as they have presented during the past few years under the influence of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All the facts of automatism to which Hélène can assign a vaguely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,approximate date group themselves around her fifteenth year, and are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all included between the limits of her ninth and twentieth years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This evident connection with a phase of development of major importance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has been confirmed to me by Leopold on various occasions, who says
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that he appeared to Hélène for the first time in her tenth year, on an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exceptional occasion of extreme fright, but after that, not until about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,four years later, because the “physiological conditions” necessary to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his apparition were not yet realized. The moment they were realized,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he says, he began to manifest himself, and it is at the same period,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to him, that Hélène commenced to recover memories of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo existence, under the form of strange visions of which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comprehended neither the nature nor the origin.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After the age of about twenty years, without affirming or believing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that her visions and apparitions ceased altogether, Mlle. Smith has no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,striking recollections of any, and she has not told me of any psychic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomenon experienced by her in the series of years immediately
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preceding her entrance into spiritism. We may infer from this, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some reason, that the ebullitions of the imaginative subconscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life gradually became calm after the explosion of the period we have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mentioned. They had been appeased. The conflict between Hélène’s inner
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nature and the environment in which she was forced to live became less
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fierce. A certain equilibrium was established between the necessities
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of practical life and her inward aspirations. On the one hand, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resigned herself to the necessities of reality; and if her native pride
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could not yield to the point of condescending to a marriage, honorable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,undoubtedly, but for which she felt she was not intended, we must
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nevertheless pay homage to the perseverance, the fidelity, the devotion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she always brought to the fulfilment of her family and business
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,duties. On the other hand, she did not permit the flame of the ideal to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be extinguished in her, and it reacted upon her environment as strongly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as possible, making its imprint upon her personality well marked.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She introduced a certain stamp of elegance into the modest home of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her parents. She arranged for herself a small _salon_, coquettish and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comfortable in its simplicity. She took lessons in music, and bought
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself a piano. She hung some old engravings on her walls, secured
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some Japanese vases, a jardinière filled with plants, cut flowers in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pretty vases, a hanging lamp with a beautiful shade of her own make,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a table-cover which she had put together and embroidered herself, some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,photographs curiously framed according to her own design; and out of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this harmonious whole, always beautifully kept, she evolved something
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,original, bizarre, and delightful, conforming well to the general
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character of her fantastic subconsciousness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At the same time that Mlle. Smith succeeded in accommodating herself to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the conditions of her existence, the state of latent timidity in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she lived gradually diminished. She is still occasionally overcome
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by fear, but much less frequently than formerly, and never without a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,legitimate exterior cause.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Indeed, judging her by these latter years, I do not recognize in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the child or young girl of former days, always timid, trembling, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frightened, taciturn and morose, who has been depicted to me by herself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her mother.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It seems to me, then, that the wildness of the dreams and automatisms,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which were symptoms of a tendency to mental disintegration, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marked the years of puberty, was succeeded by a progressive diminution
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these troubles and a gradual gaining of wisdom on the part of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the subliminal strata. We may presume that this harmonization, this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reciprocal adaptation of the internal to the external, would in time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have perfected itself, and that the whole personality of Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would have continued to consolidate and unify itself, if spiritism had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not come all of a sudden to rekindle the fire which still slumbered
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under the ashes and to give a new start to the subliminal mechanism
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which was beginning to grow rusty.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The suppressed fictions aroused themselves, the reveries of former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years resumed their sway, and the images of subliminal phantasy began
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be more prolific than ever under the fertile suggestions of occult
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,philosophy, rallying-points or centres of crystallization—such as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea of former existences and reincarnations—around which they had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only to group and organize themselves in order to give birth to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vast somnambulistic constructions the development of which we shall be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obliged to follow.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER III
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,            MLLE. SMITH SINCE HER INITIATION INTO SPIRITISM
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Having endeavored in the preceding chapter to reconstruct in its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chief characteristics the history of Mlle. Smith up to the time when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism begins to be mixed up with it, I would have preferred in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present chapter to make a detailed study of her psychological life
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during these last years, without however, as yet, touching upon the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content, properly so called, of her automatisms. Not having been able
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to accomplish this design to my satisfaction, for want of time and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,patience, I shall endeavor at least to systematize my notes somewhat
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by grouping them under four heads. I shall trace the birth of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumship as far as it is possible for me to do so from the meagre
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accounts I have been able to procure concerning a time at which I was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not acquainted with her. Then, passing to facts with which I am more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,familiar, I will describe rapidly her normal state as I have been able
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to see it for the last five years. This would have been the place for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a study of individual psychology, but I have been compelled to abandon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the idea on account of multiple difficulties. Finally, I will offer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a few remarks on the abnormal side of her existence, which it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convenient to divide into two groups, namely, _the spontaneous_—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is to say, springing up of themselves in the course of her ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life; or those _provoked_ by the voluntary seeking for favorable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circumstances, and which constitute the seances properly so called.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I. THE MEDIUMISTIC BEGINNINGS OF MLLE. SMITH
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the winter of 1891-92 Mlle. Smith heard spiritism spoken of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by one of her acquaintances, Mme. Y., who lent her Denis’s book,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_Après la Mort_. The perusal of this work having vividly excited
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s curiosity, Mme. Y. agreed to accompany her to her friend,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Z., who was interested in the same questions, and who produced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatic writing. They then decided to form a circle for regular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experimentation. I take from the notes which Mlle. Z. has had the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kindness to furnish me, the account, unfortunately very brief, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances at which Hélène’s mediumistic faculties first made their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“It was on the 20th of February, 1892, that I made the acquaintance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith. She was introduced to me by Mme. Y., for the purpose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of endeavoring to form a spiritistic group. She was then altogether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a novice in spiritism, never having attempted anything, and did not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suspect the faculties that have since developed themselves in her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“February 20.—First reunion: We seat ourselves at the table; we succeed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in making it oscillate. We regard Mme. Y. as the medium upon whom we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,can reckon. We try for writing. We receive through me encouragements
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to proceed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“February 26.—Progress; the table moves itself considerably, salutes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one by one all the members of the group, and gives us certain names, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which only one is recognized.... Writing: Mlle. Smith, who tries for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first time, writes mechanically, her eyes closed, some phrases, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which we can decipher some words.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“March 11.—Nothing at this seance, except a communication written by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,myself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“March 18.—Progress; clear communication by the table. Attempt to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experiment in the darkness (which was not absolute, the hall outside
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having some incandescent lights which diffused a feeble light; we could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguish each other with difficulty). Mlle. Smith sees a balloon,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,now luminous, now becoming dark: she has seen nothing up to this time.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Writing: Mlle. Smith writes mechanically a quite long communication
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the father of M. K. [a Bulgarian student present at the seance];
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,advice to him.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At this point the sitters became so numerous that they broke up into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two groups, of which the one continuing to meet with Mlle. Z. does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concern us. Mlle. Smith became a member of the other, which met at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,house of a lady named N., where weekly seances were held for a year and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a half (up to the end of June, 1893). The records of these meetings,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kept by Mme. N., are unfortunately very brief and obscure on many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,points of interest to the psychologist. Those of the first months are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the handwriting of Mlle. Smith, who acted as secretary of the group
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for thirty seances. As she only took down at the time the headings of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the communications of the spirits and wrote out the remainder on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following day, we cannot rely very strongly on the objective accuracy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these accounts, which, however, have the advantage of presenting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to us the mediumship of Hélène, as related by herself. She speaks of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself in the third person.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following is a summary of the two first seances held in this new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“March 25, 1892.—Eleven persons around a large and heavy dining-table
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of oak with two leaves. The table is set in motion, and several spirits
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,come and give their names (by raps), and testify to the pleasure it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives them to find themselves among us. It is at this seance that Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith begins to distinguish vague gleams with long white streamers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moving from the floor to the ceiling, and then a magnificent star,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which in the darkness appears to her alone throughout the whole of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance. We augur from this that she will end by seeing things more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinctly and will possess the gift of clairvoyance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“April 1.—Violent movements of the table, due to a spirit who calls
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself David and announces himself as the spiritual guide of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,group. Then he gives way to another spirit who says he is Victor Hugo,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the guide and protector of Mlle. Smith, who is very much surprised
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be assisted by a person of such importance. He soon disappears.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith is very much agitated; she has fits of shivering, is very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cold. She is very restless, and sees suddenly, balancing itself above
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table, a grinning, very ill-favored face, with long red hair. She
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is so frightened that she demands that the lights be lit. She is calmed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and reassured. The figure disappears. Afterwards she sees a magnificent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bouquet of roses of different hues being placed on the table before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one of the sitters, M.P. All at once she sees a small snake come out
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from underneath the bouquet, which, crawling quickly, perceives the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flowers, looks at them, tries to reach the hand of M.P., withdraws for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an instant, comes back slowly, and disappears in the interior of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bouquet. Then all is dissolved and three raps are given on the table,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,terminating the seance. [M.P. interprets the meaning of the vision of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the bouquet and the serpent as a symbolic translation of an emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impression experienced by Mlle. Smith].”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Such was the birth of Hélène’s mediumship. Scarcely anything happened
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the 20th of February, when the movements of the table were not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attributed to her (although in all probability she caused them); in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following seances she appeared in two attempts at automatic writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(unfortunately lost) in imitation of the writing medium with whom she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was sitting. The outcome of this second attempt leads us to suppose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Hélène’s faculties would have developed rapidly in that direction
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,if she had not abandoned it and changed her environment.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Her visual faculty, suggested by the experiments at obscure seances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shows itself on the 18th and 25th of March in the form of elementary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinations or vague figures having their point of departure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probably in the simple entoptical phenomena, the retina’s own light,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consecutive images, etc. Then, encouraged by the predictions of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters, she attained on the 1st of April to visions properly so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,called, having a varied content and a real or symbolic signification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At the same time her typtological automatism was perfecting itself. We
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recognize it in the name of Victor Hugo, coming especially for Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith, and suspect it to have been a name already given at the second
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive hallucinations follow closely upon the visual, but it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossible to know at just what date, as the records do not clearly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicate whether the messages recorded had that origin or were rapped
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,out on the table. To these known forms of automatism must be added
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the frequent phenomena of emotion, shiverings, sadness, restlessness,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fear, etc., which are experienced by Hélène without knowing why, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are afterwards found to be in perfect conformity to, and in evident
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connection with, the content of those emotional phenomena which they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generally precede by a few moments.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thus, in a half-dozen weekly seances, the mediumship of Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was invested with a complex psychological aspect, which from that time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it preserved intact for three years, and of which I was a witness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after I made her acquaintance. This rapidity of development is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at all unusual; but there is this peculiarity about Hélène, that her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumistic faculties, after their first appearance, remained for a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long time stationary, and then underwent all at once, in the spring
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of 1895, the enormous transformation and tremendous expansion which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have described in the first chapter, and to which I will not again
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refer.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,II. MLLE. SMITH IN HER NORMAL STATE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I was about to say that in her normal state Mlle. Smith is normal.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Certain scruples restrain me, and I correct myself by saying that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her ordinary state she seems just like anybody else. By this I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mean that outside of the gaps which the seances and the spontaneous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,eruptions of automatism make in her life, no one would suspect,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observing her performance of her various duties, or in talking with her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on all sorts of subjects, all that she is capable of in her abnormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,states, or the curious treasures which are concealed in her subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strata.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,With a healthy and ruddy complexion, of good height, well proportioned,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of regular and harmonious features, she breathes health in everything.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She presents no visible stigmata of degeneration. As to psychic defects
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or anomalies, with the exception of her mediumship itself, I know
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of none, the timidity of her youth having entirely disappeared. Her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,physical strength is marvellous, as shown by the fact that she bears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up under the strain of a business which demands nearly eleven hours of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her time each day, nearly all of which she is compelled to stand on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her feet, and from which she takes only one week’s vacation in summer.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Besides this confining work away from home, she assists her mother
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about the house morning and evening, in the housekeeping duties, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finds time besides to read a little, to practise at her piano, and to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make the lovely handiwork, which she designs and executes herself with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarkable originality and good taste. To a life so full must be added,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,besides, the spiritistic seances which she is generally willing to give
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on Sunday, and sometimes on a weekday evening, very disinterestedly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to persons who are interested in psychic questions or who desire to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consult Leopold on important subjects.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While hesitating to affirm that a person presenting phenomena so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extraordinary as those of mediumship is perfectly normal in other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,respects, I am pleased to discover that as far as Mlle. Smith is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerned, through my conversations with her and as the result of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my investigations concerning her, she does not present a single
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abnormality, physical, intellectual, or moral, between the periods
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the irruptions of her automatisms. Her field of vision, which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has permitted me to measure with a Landolt perimeter, is normal for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,white as well as for colors, for which latter she has a very delicate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perception. There is no trace of tactile anæsthesia in her hands. There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is no known motor trouble. The tremor of the index-finger gives a line,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of four oscillations per second on an average, differing not at all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the fines obtained from persons perfectly normal (see Fig. 2).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It cannot be expected that I should paint a full moral and intellectual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,portrait of Mlle. Smith, as I should be in danger of hurting her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feelings in case my attempt should come to her notice. I can only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,touch on a few points. One of the most striking is her great native
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dignity; her bearing, her manners, her language are always perfect,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and have a certain quality of _noblesse_ and pride which accords well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with her somnambulistic rôles. On occasion she shows a stately and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regal hauteur. She is very impressionable, and feels little things
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very keenly. Her antipathies as well as her sympathies are quick,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lively, and tenacious. She is energetic and persevering. She knows
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very well what she wants, and nothing passes her by unperceived, nor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does she forget anything in the conduct of others towards her. “I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,see everything, nothing escapes me, and I forgive but never forget,”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she has often said to me. Perhaps a severe moralist would find in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her a certain exaggeration of personal sensibility, but that sort of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,self-love is a very common characteristic of human nature, and is very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,natural in mediums who are continually exposed to public criticism.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She is very intelligent and highly gifted. In conversation she shows
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself vivacious, sprightly, and sometimes sarcastic. Psychic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,problems, and all questions connected with mediumistic phenomena, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she is herself so striking an example, occupy her mind a great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,deal and form the principal subject of her private thoughts and of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversations with people in whom she is interested.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Her philosophical views are not wanting in originality or breadth. She
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not believe in spiritism, in the generally accepted sense of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,term, and has never consented, in spite of the advances which have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made to her, to become a member of the Geneva Society (spiritistic)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for Psychic Studies, because, as she says, she has no fixed ideas on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subjects so obscure, does not care for theories, and “does not work
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the interest of any party.” She investigates, she observes, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reflects and discusses, having adopted for her motto, “The truth in all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,things, for all things, and always.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are two points in regard to which she is uncompromising—namely,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the objective reality of Leopold, and the supernormal content of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatisms. No one dares tell her that her great invisible protector
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is only an illusory apparition, another part of herself, a product of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her subconscious imagination; nor that the strange peculiarities of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumistic communications—the Sanscrit, the recognizable signatures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of deceased persons, the thousand correct revelations of facts unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her—are but old forgotten memories of things which she saw or heard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her childhood. Such suppositions being contrary to her inmost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beliefs, and seemingly false in fact, easily irritate her, as being in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,defiance of good sense and an outrage on truth. But outside of these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two subjects she will examine and discuss coolly any hypothesis one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chooses. The idea that she should be the reincarnation of a Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,princess or of Marie Antoinette, that Leopold is really Cagliostro,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the visions called Martian are really from the planet Mars, etc.,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all seem to her to conform fully to the facts; but these beliefs are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not indispensable to her, and she is ready, should they prove to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,false, to change to other theories—as, for example, telepathy, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mixture of occult influences, a mysterious meeting in her of intuitions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming from some higher sphere, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Undoubtedly the supposition of her pre-existences in India and on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,throne of France seems to her to explain in a plausible manner the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feeling, which has followed her from childhood, of belonging to a world
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,higher than that in which the chance of birth has imprisoned her for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this life; but she does not affirm a positive belief in that brilliant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,past, is not wholly convinced of it, and remains in a sensible state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,expectancy of the true explanation of these ultimate mysteries of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is another subject, also, which is close to her heart. She has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard it said that in the eyes of scientists and physicians mediums
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are considered to be fools, hysterical subjects, or insane, or, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any event, abnormal, in the bad sense of the word. But, in the light
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the experience of every day of her life, she protests vigorously
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against this odious insinuation. She declares emphatically that she is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“perfectly sane in body and mind, not in the least unbalanced,” and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repels with indignation the idea there can be any serious abnormality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or the least danger in mediumship such as she practises. “I am far from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being abnormal,” she wrote me recently, “and I have never been so clear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of vision, so lucid, and so apt to judge correctly as since I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,begun to develop as a medium.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, too, speaking through her voice during her trances, has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more than once solemnly testified as to her perfect health. He has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also returned to the subject by letter; we shall find farther on a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very interesting certificate of mental equilibrium dictated by him
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and written by him with her hand, as if to give more weight to his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,declarations (see Fig. 8, p. 137.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is incontestable that Hélène has a very well-organized brain, as is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidenced by the admirable manner in which she manages the important
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and complicated department which is under her direction in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,commercial establishment in which she is employed. To accuse her of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being insane, simply because she is a medium, as some charitable souls
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(the world is full of them) do not hesitate to do sometimes, is, to say
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the least, a most inadmissible _petitio principii_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The opinion which Mlle. Smith holds in her normal state concerning her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatic faculties is altogether optimistic; and there is nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to prove her in the wrong. She regards her mediumship as a rare and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,precious privilege, with which nothing in the world would induce her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to part. True, she also sees in it the reason for the malevolent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and unjust judgments, the jealousies, the base suspicions, to which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ignorant multitude have in all ages subjected those who have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,succeeded in elevating themselves above it through the possession
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of faculties of this kind. But, on the whole, the disadvantages are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more than counterbalanced by gains of a high order, and the inward
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,satisfaction attached to such a gift. And here I desire to emphasize
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the statement, once for all, that Hélène does not belong to the class
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of professional mediums, nor to those who use their mediumship for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the purpose of coining money. Mlle. Smith, who earns her living in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the position which her intelligence and fitness have secured for her,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and through which her family enjoys a modest ease, never accepts any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pecuniary compensation for her seances or consultations. Such a traffic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in faculties which have a sort of religious signification in her eyes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would be absolutely repugnant to her feelings.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s spontaneous automatisms have often aided her in, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ever having interfered with, her daily occupations. There is, happily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for her, a great difference in intensity between the phenomena of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances and those which break in upon her habitual existence, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latter never having caused such disturbance of her personality as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,former.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In her daily life she has only passing hallucinations limited to one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or two of the senses, superficial hemisomnambulisms, compatible with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a certain amount of self-possession—in short, ephemeral perturbations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of no importance from a practical point of view. Taken as a whole, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interventions of the subliminal in her ordinary existence are more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beneficial to her than otherwise, since they often bear the stamp of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,utility and appropriateness, which make them very serviceable.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Phenomena of hypermnesia, divination, lost objects mysteriously
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovered, happy inspirations, true presentiments, correct
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intuitions—in a word, teleological automatisms of every sort—she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possesses in so high a degree that this small coin of genius is more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than sufficient to compensate for the inconveniences resulting from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the distraction and momentary absence of mind with which the vision is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the seances, on the contrary, she presents the most grave functional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,alterations that one can imagine, and passes through accesses of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lethargy, catalepsy, somnambulism, total change of personality, etc.,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the least of which would be a very disagreeable adventure for her if it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,should happen to occur in the street or at her office.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But here I am obliged to leave Hélène’s ordinary state to enter upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the study of her automatisms.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,III. SPONTANEOUS AUTOMATIC PHENOMENA
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The automatisms which occur outside the seances in Mlle. Smith’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,every-day life, those, at least, which she is able to recall and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,narrate, are of a frequency very variable and utterly independent of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any known circumstances; sometimes presenting themselves two or three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,times in the same day; at others, two or three weeks will elapse
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without a single one. Extremely diverse in their form and content,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these phenomena may be divided into three categories, based upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their origin. The first proceed from impressions received by Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in moments of special suggestibility; the second are the fortuitous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparitions above the ordinary level of her consciousness, the romances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in process of elaboration to which we are coming; the last, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,differ from the two preceding species (which are always useless, if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not detrimental) by their beneficial character and their adaptation to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the needs of the moment, are roused by those teleological automatisms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to which I have already called attention as having occurred in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,childhood, and which have shared in the general recrudescence of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subconscious life under the lash of the spiritistic experiences.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Let us pass these different cases rapidly in review.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. _Permanence of exterior suggestions._—The spiritistic reunions are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,naturally their principal source. I do not mean that she has there been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subjected to experiments in post-hypnotic suggestion. Justice to all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those who have attended the seances compels the statement that they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have never abused the suggestibility which she shows on such occasions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by suggesting ideas of such a nature as to cause her annoyance on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the following days. The most that has been attempted has been the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestion of some small matters by way of harmless experiment, to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,executed by her a few moments after awaking from her trance. There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is no need of intentional suggestions to influence her in a lasting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manner; therefore we have avoided as far as possible everything that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,might leave disagreeable traces behind, and have suggested to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before the end of the seance that she have on the morrow no headache,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fatigue, etc.; but it sometimes happens that certain incidents,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often absolutely insignificant, are engraved on her memory in a most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unlooked-for manner and assail her as inexplicable obsessions during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ensuing week. The following are some specimens of involuntary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestion, which generally linger for three or four days, but may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasionally continue for twelve or fifteen.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène told me one Sunday that she had been possessed several times
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during the day by the hallucinatory image of a straw hat, the inside of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which was turned towards her, and which remained vertically in the air
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about three or four feet in front of her, without being held by any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one. She had the feeling that this hat belonged to me, and I happened
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finally to recollect that at the seance of the preceding Sunday I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,happened to fan myself with this very hat during her final trance, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,image of which had been engraved on her mind in one of the flashes in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she opened her eyes and closed them again instantly before her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,final awaking. This obsession, said she, was very strong on Monday and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the following day or two, but lessened somewhat towards the end of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,week.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At another time she preserved during a whole week the sensation of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pressure of my thumb on her left eyebrow. (Compression of the external
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frontal and suborbital nerves is a means I often employ to hasten her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,awaking, after a hint given by Leopold.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There happened to her also twice in the same day an auditive and visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucination of an aged person whom she did not recognize, but the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extremely characteristic description of whom corresponds so well with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of a gentleman of Geneva who had been mentioned to her a few days
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,previously, immediately before the commencement of a seance (when she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was probably already in her state of suggestibility), that there is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scarcely any doubt but that these apparitions were the consequence of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that conversation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Following another seance where she had, at the beginning of a Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scene, made vain efforts to detach a bracelet from her left wrist, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preserved for three days the feeling of something grasping that wrist,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without understanding what it could be.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the same way, various feelings of sadness, anger, a desire to laugh
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or to weep, etc., the cause of which she was unable to explain, have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often followed her for a considerable length of time after the seances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of which these feelings were the manifest emotional echo. This is often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the effect of our dreams on our waking state: we forget the dreams, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their influence remains, and is often more marked in the dreams of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypnotized person or a somnambulist than in those of ordinary sleep.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The seances are not the exclusive source of the involuntary suggestions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which trouble Mlle. Smith in her daily life without any benefit to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself. It is evident that on every occasion when she finds herself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in that particular condition of least resistance which we, in our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ignorance of its intrinsic nature, designate by the convenient name of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“suggestibility,” she is exposed to impressions capable of returning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to assail her in the course of her daily occupations. Fortunately this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,condition of suggestibility does not seem to develop itself readily in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her outside of the spiritistic reunions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. _Irruptions of subliminal reveries._—I shall have too many occasions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to cite concrete examples of visions, voices, and other spontaneous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,outpourings of the work of imagination, which are continually going on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under the ordinary consciousness of Mlle. Smith, to dwell long on this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point. Some general remarks will suffice.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The connection which the unforeseen phenomena maintain with those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the seances themselves is very varied. Sometimes we are able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recognize them as reproductions, more or less incomplete, of episodes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which occurred at the preceding seances, and consider them simple
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,echoes or post-hypnotic repetitions of these last. Sometimes, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contrary, it appears that we have to deal with preparatory rehearsals
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of scenes which will unfold themselves at length and will be continued
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at some later seance. Finally, sometimes it is a question of tableaux,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having no connection with those which fill up the seances; they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are like leaves, flying away never to return, romances which are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,continually being fabricated in the deep subliminal strata of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith’s consciousness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, in fact, does not long remember, nor in much detail, with a few
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exceptions, those visions which take place in her ordinary state, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which occur most frequently early in the morning, while she is still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in bed, or just after she has arisen and while working by the light
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her lamp; sometimes in the evening, or during the brief moments of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rest in the middle of the day, and, much more rarely, while in the full
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,activity of waking hours she is at her desk. If she had not long since,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at my request, and with great good will, acquired the habit of noting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in pencil the essential content of these apparitions, either during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the apparition itself (which she is not always able to do) or else
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately afterwards, we should have still more deficiencies in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plot of her romances to deplore. Hélène’s psychological state, during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her spontaneous visions, is known to me only by her own descriptions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She is fortunately a very intelligent observer and a good psychologist.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Her narratives show that her visions are accompanied by a certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,degree of obnubilation. For a few moments, for instance, the room, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,light of the lamp, disappear from before her eyes; the noise of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wheels in the street ceases to be heard; she feels herself becoming
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inert and passive, while a feeling of bliss and ecstatic well-being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,permeates her entire individuality in the presence of the spectacle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which appears to her; then the vision, to her great regret, slowly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fades from her view, the lamp and the furniture reappear, the outside
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,noises again make themselves heard, and she is astonished that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea did not occur to her to put down in pencil the strange words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she has heard, or that she did not touch or caress, for example, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beautiful birds of many-colored plumage flying and singing around her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sometimes she has maintained sufficient presence of mind to scribble
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from dictation the words striking her ear; but the wretched handwriting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proves that her attention, all absorbed by the apparition, could not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,follow the pencil, and that the hand directed it badly. At other times
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the reverse is the fact. It appears in the course of the vision as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,though some one took hold of her arm and guided it in spite of herself;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the result is splendid calligraphies, wholly different from her own
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting, executed without her knowledge, and during the execution
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of which her mind was wholly absent, if we can judge from the surprise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she shows on awaking when she finds before her these strange writings,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and from analogous scenes which transpire at the seances.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The preceding is applicable especially to the more frequent cases—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is, to the morning or evening visions which happen to her at home,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in that intermediate condition between sleep and waking, always so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,favorable, as we know, to the development of unconscious cerebration.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But there are innumerable shades and gradations between this middle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,type, so to speak, and its opposite extremes; on the one hand is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fortunately very exceptional case where she is seized with ecstasy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while at her place of business; and, on the other hand, that in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the automatism limits itself to inscribing some unknown characters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or words in another hand than her own in her correspondence and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,writings—peculiar _lapsus calami_, which she is not slow to perceive on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming to herself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following is an example of a case of ecstasy:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Having ascended one day to an upper story, to look for something in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dark store-room, she had an apparition of a man in a turban and large
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,white cloak, whom she had the impression of recognizing,[4] and whose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presence filled her with a delightful calm and profound happiness. She
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could not recall the conversation which passed between them, which,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,though in an unknown language, she nevertheless had the feeling of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having perfectly comprehended. On the departure of the mysterious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visitor she was astonished to find herself brought back to sombre
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reality, and stupefied on noting by her watch that the interview had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lasted much longer than it had seemed to do. She preserved all that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,day a delicious feeling of well-being as the effect of the strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparition.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The phenomenon of mingling strange writing with her own is of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relatively frequent occurrence, and we shall see divers specimens of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it in the following chapters, apropos of the romances to which it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,especially belongs. I will give here only one complex example, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will serve at the same time as an illustration of a special kind of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatism, very harmless, to which Hélène is also subject, and which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consists in making verses, not without knowing, but at least without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intending to do so, and in connection with the most trifling matters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are times when, in spite of herself, she feels compelled to speak
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in distinct rhymes of eight feet, which she does not prepare, and does
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not perceive until the moment she has finished uttering them.[5] In
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this particular case it is by a quatrain (a very unusual occurrence)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that she replies to some one who had consulted her in regard to some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blue ribbon. But this quatrain, by its style, by the vision of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blond head of a child which accompanies it, and by the manner also in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she writes it, causes us to hazard the conjecture that it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an inspiration depending on the underlying Royal cycle; while in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following letter, in which she narrates the affair to M. Lemaître, her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pen inscribes, all unknown to her, strange characters evidently due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the cropping out of the Martian cycle, of which she speaks in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letter (see Fig. 1, a passage of that letter making a Martian M and V
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the words _vers_ and _rimait_):
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[Illustration: Fig. 1. Fragment of a letter (normal handwriting)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith, containing two Martian letters. (Collection of M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Lemaître.)]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I have heard some Martian words this afternoon, but have not been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to retain them in my mind. I send you those heard a few days
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ago, when I had the vision of which I am about to make you the design
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(Martian lamp). Yesterday morning I for the first time spoke in verse,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without being aware of it; it was only on finishing the sentence that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I perceived that it rhymed, and I reconstructed it to assure myself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the fact. A little later, on examining some ribbons, I began anew
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to speak in verse, and I send those also; they will amuse you. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is a curious thing that I had at that same moment the vision of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blond curly head of a child bound with a blue ribbon. The vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lasted more than a minute. What is still more curious, I do not at all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollect having worn ribbons of that shade as a child: I remember some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rose-colored, some red, but I have no recollection whatever of any blue
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ribbons. I really do not know why I spoke these words; it is the more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,amusing. I was obliged to speak them, I assure you, in spite of myself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I was eager to put them on paper, and I noticed in writing them down
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that, for a moment, the handwriting was not regular, that is, it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slightly different from mine.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here is the quatrain, the pencil impression of which is too faint to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enable a fac-simile to be reproduced here, and in it I have indicated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by italics the words and syllables the calligraphy or orthography of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which differs from that of Hélène and becomes the style of automatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting called that of Marie Antoinette:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Les nuances de ces rubans
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    _Me_ rappelent _mes_ jeunes ans;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Ce bleu _ver_di, je m’en sou_vien_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Sans mes cheveux _alloit_ si bien!”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The head of curly blond hair, ornamented with blue ribbons, also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,figures in the visions of the Royal cycle, and appears to belong, as is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,here the case, sometimes to Marie Antoinette herself, sometimes to one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or other of her children, especially the Dauphin.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While it is generally easy to connect these eruptions of the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,volcano with the various dreams from which they emanate, such is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not always the case, and there are visions the origin of which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,doubtful and ambiguous. We must not forget that, alongside of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grand cycles of Hélène which are better known, there also float in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her latent imagination innumerable small accessory systems, more or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,less independent, which supply a large part of the seances, such
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as revelations of former events connected with the families of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters, etc.; it is not always possible to identify the fragments
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming from these isolated dreams.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. _Teleological automatisms._—The spontaneous phenomena of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,category, possessing as a common characteristic a practical utility
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for Hélène more or less marked, can be subdivided into two classes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to their direct attachment to the personality of Leopold, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their not belonging to any distinct personality, and which only express
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a vivid manner the result of the normal working, although more or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,less unconscious, of the faculties of memory and of reason. I confine
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,myself now to citing one case of each of these classes, of which we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shall see other examples in the chapters relating to Leopold and to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal appearances.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One day Mlle. Smith, wishing to take down a large and heavy object
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from a high shelf, was prevented from so doing by the fact that her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,uplifted arms seemed as though petrified and incapable of being moved
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for some seconds; she saw in this a warning and gave up her intention.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a later seance Leopold said that it was he himself who had caused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s arms to become rigid, in order to prevent her from attempting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to lift the object which was too heavy for her and would have caused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some accident to befall her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On another occasion a clerk who sought vainly for a certain pattern
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asked Hélène if she knew what had become of it. Hélène replied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mechanically and without reflection, “Yes, it was sent to Mr. J.” (a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,customer of the firm); at the same time there appeared before her in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,large black figures about eight or ten inches in height the number
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,18, and she added, instinctively, “It was eighteen days ago.” This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,statement caused the clerk to smile, because of its improbability,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the rule of the house being that customers to whom patterns were lent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for examination must return them inside of three days or a messenger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would be sent for them. Hélène, struck by this objection, and having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,no conscious recollection of the affair, replied, “Really, perhaps I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,am wrong.” Meanwhile, an investigation of the date indicated in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,records of the house showed that she was perfectly correct. It was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through various negligences, with which she had nothing at all to do,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the pattern had not been sent for or recovered. Leopold, on being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asked, has no recollection of this circumstance, and does not appear to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been the author of this automatism of cryptomnesia, nor of many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other analogous phenomena through which Hélène’s subconscious memory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,renders her signal services and has gained for her a well-merited and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,highly valued reputation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thus we see that if the spontaneous automatisms of Mlle. Smith are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often the vexatious result of her moments of suggestibility, or the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tempestuous irruption of her subliminal reveries, they also often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assume the form of useful messages. Such compensation is not to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,despised.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,IV. THE SEANCES
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith has never been hypnotized. In her instinctive aversion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she shares with the majority of mediums, to anything that seems
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like an attempt to experiment upon her, she has always refused to allow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself to be put to sleep. She does not realize that in avoiding the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea she has actually accepted the reality, since her spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experiences in reality constitute for her an autohypnotization, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inevitably degenerates into a hetero-hypnotization, as she is brought
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under the influence of one or other of the persons present at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All her seances have somewhat of the same psychologic form, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same method of development running through their immense diversity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of content. She places herself at the table with the idea and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intention of bringing into play her mediumistic faculties. After an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interval, varying from a few seconds to a quarter of an hour, generally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a shorter time if the room is well darkened and the sitters are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perfectly silent, she begins to have visions, preceded and accompanied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by very varied sensory and motor disturbances, after which she passes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into a complete trance. In that state, it rarely happens, and then only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for a few moments, that she is entirely unconscious of the persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present, and, as it were, shut up within her personal dream and plunged
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into profound lethargy (hypnotic syncope). Ordinarily she remains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in communication, more or less close, with one of the sitters, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thus finds himself in the same relation towards her as a hypnotizer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,towards his subject, and able to take advantage of that _rapport_, by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,giving her any immediate or future suggestions that he may desire.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When the seance consists only of waking visions, it lasts generally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only a short time—an hour to an hour and a half—and is ended quickly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by three sharp raps upon the table, after which Mlle. Smith returns
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her normal state, which she scarcely seems to have left. If the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism has been complete, the seance is prolonged to double that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,length of time, and often longer, and the return to the normal state
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comes slowly through phases of deep sleep, alternating with relapses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into somnambulistic gestures and attitudes, moments of catalepsy, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The final awakening is always preceded by several brief awakenings,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,followed by relapses into sleep.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Each of these preliminary awakenings, as well as the final one, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied by the same characteristic movements of the features. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,eyes, which have been for a long time closed, open wide, stupidly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,staring into vacancy, or fix themselves slowly on the objects and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the sitters within their range of vision, the dilated pupils do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,react, the face is an impassive and rigid mask, devoid of expression.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène seems altogether absent. All at once, with a slight heaving
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the breast and raising of the head, and a quick breath, a gleam
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of intelligence illumines her countenance, the mouth is gracefully
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opened, the eyes become brilliant, the entire countenance lights up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with a pleasant smile and gives evidence of her recognition of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world and of her return to herself. But with the same suddenness with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which it appeared, that appearance of life lasts but a second or two,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the physiognomy resumes its lifeless mask, the eyes becoming haggard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and fixed close again, and the head falls on the back of the chair.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This return of sleep will be followed by another sudden awaking, then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perhaps by several more, until the final awaking, always distinguished,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after the smile at the beginning, by the stereotyped question, “What
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time is it?” and by a movement of surprise on learning that it is so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,late. There is no memory of what has transpired during the seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A complete description of the psychological and physiological phenomena
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which present themselves, or which might be obtained in the course
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the seances, would detain me too long, since there is absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing constant either in the nature or in the succession of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena, and no two seances are evolved exactly in the same manner. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must confine myself to some striking characteristics.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Three principal symptoms, almost contemporaneous generally, announce
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Mlle. Smith is beginning to enter into her trance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are on the one side emotional or cœnæsthetic modifications, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cause of which is revealed a little later in the subsequent messages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène is, for instance, seized by an invincible desire to laugh, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she cannot or will not explain; or she complains of sadness, fear, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,different unpleasant sensations, of heat or of cold, of nausea, etc.,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to the nature of the communications which are approaching and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of which these emotional states are the forerunners.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are, on the other hand, phenomena of systematic anæsthesia
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(negative hallucinations), limited to those sitters whom the coming
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,messages concern. Hélène ceases to see them, while continuing to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hear their voices and feel their touch; or, on the contrary, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is astonished to no longer hear them, though she sees their lips
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moving, etc.; or, finally, she does not perceive them in any manner,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and demands to know why they are leaving when the seance is hardly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,begun. In its details this systematic anæsthesia varies infinitely,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and extends sometimes to but one part of the person concerned, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his hand, to a portion of his face, etc., without it always being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possible to explain these capricious details by the content of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following visions; it would seem that the incoherence of the dream
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presides over this preliminary work of disintegration, and that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,normal perceptions are absorbed by the subconscious personality eager
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for material for the building up of the hallucinations which it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preparing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Systematic anæsthesia is often complicated with positive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinations, and Hélène will manifest her surprise at seeing, for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,example, a strange costume or an unusual coiffure. This, in reality, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the vision which is already being installed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The third symptom, which does not manifest itself clearly in her,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but the presence of which can be often established before all the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,others by investigation, is a complete allochiria,[6] ordinarily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied by various other sensory and motor disturbances. If, at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the beginning of the seance, Hélène is asked, for example, to raise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her right hand, to move the left index-finger, or to close one eye,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she begins straightway to carry into effect these different acts; then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all at once, without knowing why and without hesitation, she deceives
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself in regard to the side, and raises her left hand, moves her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,right index-finger, closes the other eye, etc. This indicates that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is no longer in her normal state, though still appearing to retain her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary consciousness, and with the liveliness of a normal person
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discusses the question of her having mistaken her right hand or eye
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for her left, and vice versa. It is to be noted that Leopold, on such
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasions of pronounced allochiria, does not share this error in regard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the side. I have assisted at some curious discussions between him
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and Hélène, she insisting that such a hand was her right, or that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Isle Rousseau is on the left as one passes the bridge of Mont Blanc or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming from the railway station, and Leopold all the while, by means of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,raps upon the table, giving her clearly to understand she was wrong.[7]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A little after the allochiria, and sometimes simultaneously with it,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are to be found various other phenomena, extremely variable, of which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,here cite only a few. One of her arms is contractured as it rests upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table, and resists the efforts of the sitters to lift it up, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,though it were a bar of iron; the fingers of the hand also participate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in this rigidity. Sometimes this contracture does not exist before,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but establishes itself at the same instant that some one touches the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forearm, and increases in proportion to the efforts which are made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to overcome it. There is no regularity in the distribution of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anæsthesia (changing from one instant to another), the contractures, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convulsions which the hands and arms of Hélène exhibit. It all seems
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,due to pure caprice, or to depend only on underlying dreams, of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little is known.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Certain analogous and likewise capricious phenomena of anæsthesia,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paralysis, sensations of all sorts, of which Hélène complains, often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appear in her face, her eyes, her mouth, etc. In the midst of all these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disturbances the visions announce themselves, and the somnambulism is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,introduced with modifications, equally variable, of other functions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidenced by tears, sobbings, sighs, repeated hiccoughs, various
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,changing of the rhythm of respiration, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If Hélène is experimented upon and questioned too long, the development
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the original visions is obstructed, and she easily reaches a degree
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of sensibility where she falls into the standard class of public
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,representations of hypnotism—a charmed and fascinated state in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she remains riveted before some brilliant object, as, for example,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ring, trinkets, or cuff-button of one of the sitters; then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,precipitates herself in a frenzy upon the object, and tries to secure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it; or assumes emotional attitudes and poses under the influence of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,joyous airs upon the piano; experiences suggested hallucinations of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all kinds, sees terrible serpents, which she pursues with a pair of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pincers; beautiful flowers, which she smells with deep respirations and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distributes to the sitters; or, again, bleeding wounds which have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made on her hand, and which cause her to shed tears. The commonplace
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character of these phenomena causes their long continuance to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,deprecated, and the ingenuity of all is exercised in endeavoring by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,different means, none of which is very efficacious or very rapid, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plunge her into profound and tranquil sleep, from which she is not long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in passing of her own accord into complete somnambulism and in taking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up the thread of her personal imaginations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If all these disturbing investigations have been successfully avoided,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the spontaneous development of the automatisms is effected with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,greater rapidity and fulness. It is possible then to behold, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same seance, a very varied spectacle, and to listen, besides, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain special communications made in a semi-waking state to one or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other of the sitters; then, in complete somnambulism, a Hindoo vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is presented, followed by a Martian dream, with an incarnation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold in the middle, and a scene of Marie Antoinette to wind up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with. Ordinarily two of these last creations will suffice to fill up a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance. One such representation is not performed without the loss of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,considerable strength by the medium, which shows itself by the final
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sleep being prolonged sometimes for an hour, interrupted, as I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,said, by repetitions of the preceding somnambulistic scenes, easily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recognizable by certain gestures or the murmuring of characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words. Passing through these diverse oscillations and the ephemeral
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,awaking, of which I have spoken above, Hélène finishes by returning to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her normal state; but the seances which have been too long continued or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,too full of movement leave her very much fatigued for the rest of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,day. It has also sometimes happened to her to re-enter the somnambulism
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(from which she had probably not completely emerged) during the course
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the evening or on returning home, and only to succeed in recovering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her perfectly normal state through the assistance of a night’s sleep.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to the real nature of Hélène’s slumbers at the end of the seances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her states of consciousness when she awakes, it is difficult for me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to pronounce, having only been able to observe them under unfavorable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conditions—that is, in the presence of sitters more or less numerous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and restless. The greater part certainly consist of somnambulisms, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she hears all that passes around her, since although she seems
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,profoundly asleep and absent, the suggestions then given her to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,carried out after awaking are registered and performed wonderfully—at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,least when Leopold, who is almost always on hand and answers by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,movements of one finger or another to questions put to him, does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make any opposition or declare that the suggestion shall not be carried
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,out! There are also brief moments when Hélène seems to be in a profound
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of coma and kind of syncope without trace of psychic life; her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pulse and respiration continue to be regular, but she does not react to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any excitation, her arms, if raised, fall heavily, no sign of Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,can be obtained, and suggestions made at that instant will not be acted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These lethargic phases, during which all consciousness seems to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abolished, are generally followed by cataleptic phases in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hands and arms preserve every position in which they may be placed,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and continue the movements of rotation or of oscillation which may be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forced upon them, but never for more than one or two minutes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In default of more complete experiments, I submit the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comparison of Hélène’s muscular force and of her sensibility to pain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before and after a seance lasting nearly three hours, the second half
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being in full somnambulism. At 4.50 o’clock, on sitting down at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table three dynamometric tests with her right hand gave kilos. 27.5,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,27, 25—average, 26.5. The sensibility to pain measured on the back
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the median phalanx of the index-finger with the algesiometer of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Griesbach, gave for the right, grs. 35, 40, 20, 20—average, 29; for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the left, 35, 20, 20, 15—average, 22.5 grs. (Sensibility slightly more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,delicate than that of another lady present at the seance, not a medium
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and in perfect health.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At 7.45 o’clock, some minutes after the final awaking: dynamometer,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,right hand, 8, 4.5, 4.5—average, 5.7; algesiometer, complete analgesia
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,both as to right and left, on the whole of the back of the index as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well as the rest of the hand and wrist, the maximum of the instrument
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(100 grs.) was attained and passed without arousing any painful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensation but only an impression of contact.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One hour later, after dinner: dynamometer 22, 22, 19—average, 21;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,algesiometer, 20, 18 for the right; 15, 20 for the left. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possible, then, to say that her muscular force and sensibility to pain,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,both normal immediately before her entrance upon the seance, are still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abolished in the first fifteen minutes after awaking, but are found to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be restored in about an hour. Perception of colors, on the contrary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appeared to be as perfect immediately after awaking as before the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance. The tremor of the index-finger, normal before the seance, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very much exaggerated in its amplitude for a certain time after awaking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and reflects sometimes the respiratory movements, as can be seen by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the curves of Fig. 2. This denotes a great diminution of kinesthetic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensibility and of voluntary control over the immobility of the hand.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 2. Tremor of right index-finger. A, B, C,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, fragments of curves taken in the normal state before the seance (A and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, C with closed eyes; B, with open eyes looking at the index-finger); D,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, E, F, fragments of curves received in succession a quarter of an hour
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, after the seance. The curve F reflects the respiratory oscillations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, The curves go from right to left, and the interval between the two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, vertical lines is ten seconds.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The state in which Mlle. Smith carries out the post-hypnotic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestions made to her in the course of her somnambulisms, when they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not come into collision with either the pronounced opposition
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold or the states of lethargy of which I have spoken, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interesting on account of its varied character, which seems to depend
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the greater or less ease with which the hallucination or the act
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggested can be reconciled with Hélène’s normal personality. Their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,execution in the full waking state seems to be confined to suggestions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of simple acts, free from absurdity, the idea of which would be easily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accepted and carried out by the normal self when the desired moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arrived. If, on the contrary, it is a question of more complicated and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficult things, compatible, however, with the rational points of view
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the normal waking state, Hélène falls momentarily into somnambulism
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for the execution of the order given, unless she has permanently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remained in that state, in spite of her apparent awaking, in order not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to re-enter definitely and completely upon her ordinary state until
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after the execution of the order, of which there then remains to her no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollection whatever.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From the foregoing facts we may conclude that little or nothing of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which goes on around her escapes her subconscious intelligence, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is from this source that her somnambulistic romances are nourished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,afresh.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A word more as to the preparation for the seances. I do not refer to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conscious preparation, but to a subliminal incubation or elaboration,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown by her, showing itself on the level of her ordinary personality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the form of fugitive gleams and fragmentary images during her sleep
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at night or the moments of awaking in the morning. Mlle. Smith, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reality, has no hold, possesses no influence, upon the nature of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions and somnambulisms. She is able, undoubtedly, up to a certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point, to aid their appearance in a general way, by cultivating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tranquillity of mind, securing darkness and silence in the room, and by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abandoning herself to a passive attitude of mind; or to hinder it, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, by movement, or distraction of attention; but with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fixed and concrete content itself of her automatisms she has nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to do and no share in the responsibility for it. So far as her great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cycles or her detached messages are concerned, they are fabricated in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her in spite of herself, and without her having a word to say about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their production, any more than one has in the formation of his dreams.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When it is recollected, on the other hand, that the phenomena of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incubation, of subliminal preparation, or unconscious cerebration, are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,universal facts, playing their rôle in the psychology of every human
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being, we can rely upon finding them also among the mediums, and upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their holding a place with them much more important than with others,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,owing to the fact that their subconscious life is so much more fully
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,developed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,With each one of us the expectation or the simple perspective of any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,event—a departure, a visit, an errand, or undertaking to do anything,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a letter to write, in short, all the more insignificant incidents of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,daily existence, when they are not absolutely unforeseen—promote a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological adaptation more or less extended and profound.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alongside of and underneath the conscious expectancy, certain physical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or mental attitudes, voluntarily assumed in view of the event, always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,effect an underlying preparation of an inward kind, a change which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we may regard, according to the side from which we consider the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individual, as a peculiar psychical orientation or cerebral adjustment,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a modification in the association of ideas or in the dynamics of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cortical nerves. But everything points to the fact that in persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gifted with mediumship this underlying preparation is capable of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assuming on occasion a greater importance than is the case with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary mortals, a much more complete independence of the ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To return to Mlle. Smith, when she knows some time in advance who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will be present at her next seance, and what people she will almost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surely meet there, it would be altogether natural that such previous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowledge of the environment and of the sitters would influence her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal thoughts and in some degree direct the course of the latent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incubation. It may well be asked, therefore, whether the varied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spectacle which the seances furnish is really always impromptu and has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its birth on the spur of the moment like ordinary dreams, or whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it has been subconsciously thought out, the seance being only the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,performance of an arrested programme, the representation _coram populo_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of scenes already ripened in the deep subliminal strata of the medium.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Neither of these two hypotheses, held to exclude the other, answers to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the facts, but there is some truth in both of them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The _menu_ of the seances—if the expression is permissible—is always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,composed of one or two _plats de résistance_, carefully prepared in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,advance in the subliminal laboratories, and of various _hors d’œuvres_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,left to the inspiration of the moment. To speak more exactly, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,general plot, the chief lines and more striking points of the scenes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which unfold themselves are fixed according to a previous arrangement,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but the details of execution and accessory embellishments are entirely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dependent upon chance circumstances. The proof of this is found, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one hand, in the suppleness, the perfect ease, the appropriateness with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Hélène’s automatisms—if we can still apply the word automatism
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to those cases in which spontaneity, self-possession, free use of all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the faculties constitute the dominant characteristics—often adapt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves to unexpected situations in the environment or capricious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interruptions on the part of the sitters; on the other hand, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the fact that Leopold, interrogated at the beginning of the seance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinarily knows very well and announces the principal vision or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnations which are about to make their appearance, provided,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at least, the spectators do not hinder their unfolding by their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tempestuous clamor for something else.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The animated conversations, sometimes full of spirited repartee,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between Leopold or Marie Antoinette and the sitters, could not have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been prepared in advance, and are altogether opposed to the stereotyped
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repetition which is generally expected of automatic phenomena. But, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, such repetition, almost entirely mechanical and devoid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of sense, presents itself on frequent occasions. I have, for instance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seen somnambulistic scenes presented which were entirely misplaced,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and constituted at the time veritable anachronisms, which would have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perfectly fitted the situation eight days previously in another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment, and for which the aforesaid scenes had been evidently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intended; but, having been withheld until the last moment by unforeseen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circumstances, the following seance gets the benefit of these postponed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,messages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here is proof that Hélène’s subliminal imagination prepares up to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain point her principal productions, in view of the conditions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and surroundings under which the seance will probably take place, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also that these products, once elaborated, must be eliminated and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,poured forth with a sort of blind necessity, at the right or the wrong
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time, whenever the entrance of Hélène into a favorable hypnoid state
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnishes them an opportunity so to do. It follows also that her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,normal personality has nothing whatever to do with the preparation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances, since she can neither suppress nor change scenes badly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adapted to the actual environment, the appearance of which sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,greatly annoys Mlle. Smith when they are recounted to her after the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance; nor can she provoke the messages, the production of which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,desires and vainly hopes for—as, for example, a medical consultation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with Leopold, the incarnation of a deceased parent, or a scene from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one cycle rather than from the others, for the benefit of a sitter who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,particularly desires it, and whom she is very desirous to please.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Much more could be said concerning the psychological side of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances of Mlle. Smith, but I must limit myself. It will be possible to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gain a more complete idea of this subject by studying the illustrations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the following chapters on the chief cycles of her brilliant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal fantasy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER IV
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                      THE PERSONALITY OF LEOPOLD
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Is Leopold really Joseph Balsamo, as he pretends? Or, since he has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing in common with the famous thaumaturgist of the last century,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,save a certain superficial resemblance, is he, at any rate, a real
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being, separate from, and independent of, Mlle. Smith? Or, finally, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he only a pseudo-reality, a kind of allotropic modification of Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself, a product of her subliminal imagination, just like our dream
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,creations and the rôles suggested to a hypnotic subject?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of these three suppositions it is the last which to my mind is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,undoubtedly the true one, while in Mlle. Smith’s eyes it is as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certainly the false view. It would be hard to imagine a more profound
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difference of opinion than that which exists between Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and myself on this subject. It is I, always, who get the worst of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discussion with her concerning it. I yield for two reasons. First, out
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of politeness; and, secondly, because I understand Hélène perfectly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and, putting myself in her place, realize that I should think exactly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as she does about the matter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Given her surroundings and personal experiences, it is impossible for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her to do otherwise than believe in the objective distinct existence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of that mysterious being who constantly enters into her life in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensible and quasi-material way, leaving her no room to doubt. He
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presents himself before her endowed with corporeality like that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other people, and hides objects which are behind him exactly as an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary individual of flesh and bone would do. He talks into her ears,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generally into the left, in a characteristic voice, which appears to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,come from a variable distance, sometimes about six feet off, sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much farther. He jars the table on which she has placed her immobile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arms, takes hold of her wrist and writes with her hand, holding the pen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a manner unlike her, and with a handwriting wholly different from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hers. He puts her to sleep without her knowledge, and she is astonished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to learn upon awaking that he has gesticulated with her arms and spoken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through her mouth in the deep bass voice of a man, with an Italian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accent, which has nothing in common with the clear and beautiful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quality of her feminine voice.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Moreover, he is not always on hand. He by no means answers Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appeals on all occasions; is not at her mercy; far from it. His
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conduct, his manifestations, his comings and goings cannot be predicted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with any certainty, and testify to an autonomous being, endowed with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,free-will, often otherwise occupied or absent on his own affairs, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not permit of his holding himself constantly at the disposal of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith. Sometimes he remains for weeks without revealing himself,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in spite of her wishing for him and calling upon him. Then, all at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,once, he makes his appearance when she least expects him. He speaks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for her in a way she would have no idea of doing, he dictates to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,poems of which she would be incapable. He replies to her oral or mental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questions, converses with her, and discusses various questions. Like a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wise friend, a rational mentor, and as one seeing things from a higher
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plane, he gives her advice, counsel, orders even sometimes directly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opposite to her wishes and against which she rebels. He consoles her,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exhorts her, soothes, encourages, and reprimands her; he undertakes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against her the defence of persons she does not like, and pleads the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cause of those who are antipathetic to her. In a word, it would be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossible to imagine a being more independent or more different from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith herself, having a more personal character, an individuality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more marked, or a more certain actual existence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène is also fortified in this conviction by the belief not only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of members of her own family, but by that of other cultivated people
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who, having attended many of her seances, have no doubt whatever
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold’s objective and separate existence. There are those who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe so firmly in the reality of this superior being, invisible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to them, that they are in the habit of calling upon him during the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absence of Mlle. Smith. Naturally they obtain responses, through the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table or otherwise, and that causes unforeseen complications sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when she comes to learn of it. For while she admits theoretically—and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold himself has often declared the same thing—that he extends
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his surveillance and protection from afar over other spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,groups, and especially over all Hélène’s friends and acquaintances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in practice and in fact, however, it happens that neither he nor she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will willingly admit the authenticity of those pretended communications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from Leopold obtained in the absence of the medium of his predilection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is generally some deceiving spirit who has manifested in his place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on these occasions. These denials, however, do not prevent those who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have become believers from continuing to believe in the omnipresence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this good genius, or from teaching their children to revere him, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make vows and address prayers to him. It must not be forgotten that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism is a religion. This also explains the great respect shown to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediums, which is like that accorded to priests.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It follows that, without in the least refraining from speaking ill of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them whenever they think they have a grievance against them, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other hand they bestow on them the same marks of respect as are only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accorded to the most sublime product of the human race.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have known a _salon_ where, on the centre table, in full view and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the place of honor, were two photographs in beautiful frames: on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the one side the head of Christ, on the other the portrait of—Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène Smith. Among other believers, with less ideal but more practical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aspirations, no business matter of importance is closed, no serious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,decision made, until Leopold has been consulted through Hélène as an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intermediary, and the cases are too numerous to mention in which he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has furnished important information, prevented a heavy pecuniary loss,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,given an efficacious medical prescription, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is easily seen how all the successes obtained by Leopold, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mystical veneration which many very estimable persons accord him,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must contribute to strengthen the faith of Hélène in her all-powerful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,protector. It is in vain that, against this absolute assurance, one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seeks to avail one’s self of the arguments of contemporary psychology.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The example of the fictions of the dream, the analogies taken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from hypnotism and from psychopathology, considerations of mental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disintegration, the division of the consciousness and the formation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of second personalities, all these refined subtleties of our modern
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scientists break in pieces like glass against immovable rock. I shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not undertake to combat a proposition which, for her, has incontestably
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so much evidence in its favor, and which resolves all difficulties in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the most felicitous manner and in conformity to good common-sense.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nevertheless, since each individual has a right to his own opinion in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the world, I beg leave to assume, for the time being, that Leopold does
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not exist outside of Mlle. Smith, and to try to discover his possible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,genesis in the mental life of the latter—solely by hypothesis and by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,means of psychological experiment. Therefore, readers who have little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taste for this kind of academic composition had better skip this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chapter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I. PSYCHOGENESIS OF LEOPOLD
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A description of the development of Leopold is not easy, since he has a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,double origin, apparent and real, like the cranial nerves which give so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much trouble to the students of anatomy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,His apparent origin, or, I should say, the moment when he is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,outwardly separated from the personality of Hélène, and manifests as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an independent “spirit,” is relatively clear and well marked; but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his actual origin, profoundly enfolded in the most inward strata of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s personality and inextricably mixed up with them, presents
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,great obscurities and can only be determined in a very conjectural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manner. Let us begin with the apparent origin, or the first appearance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold at the seances.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is easy to understand that, once initiated into spiritism and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plunged into a current of ideas where the comforting doctrine of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirit-guides and protectors holds an important place, Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,did not delay in coming into possession of, like all good mediums, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnate spirit specially attached to her person. She even had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two in succession, Victor Hugo and Cagliostro. It is not a question
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a simple change of name of the guide of Hélène, who presented
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself first under the aspect and the name of the great poet and then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,afterwards adopted that of the renowned thaumaturgist, but there were,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at least at the beginning, two different personalities, apparently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hostile to each other, one of whom by degrees supplanted the other,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after a struggle, a trace of which is found in the very incomplete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reports of the seances of that period. Three phases can also be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguished in the psychogenesis of Mlle. Smith’s guide: an initial
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phase of five months, during which Victor Hugo reigns alone; a phase of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,transition of about a year, when the protection of Victor Hugo is seen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be powerless to protect Hélène and her spiritistic group against
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the invasion of an intruder called Leopold, who claims and manifests an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,increasing authority over the medium by virtue of mysterious relations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the course of a previous existence; finally, the present period,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which has lasted for six years past, in which Victor Hugo no longer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,figures, and which may be dated approximately from the moment when it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was revealed that Leopold is only an assumed name, under which he hides
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in reality the great personality of Joseph Balsamo.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I do not find any fact worthy of mention in the first phase, in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Victor Hugo, who seems to have appeared as the guide of Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about the 1st of April, 1892 (see above, p. 38), played a rôle of no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,importance. In the second phase, however, it is necessary to cite some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extracts from the reports of the seances of the N. group, in order to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,throw light upon the singular character which Leopold manifested there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the beginning.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,August 26, 1892.—“A spirit announces himself under the name of Leopold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He comes for Mlle. Smith, and seems to wish to have a great authority
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,over her. She sees him for some moments, he appears to be about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thirty-five years of age, and is clothed altogether in black. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,expression of his countenance is rather pleasing, and through answers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to some questions which we put to him we are given to understand that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he knew her in another existence, and that he does not wish her to give
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her heart to any one here below.... Mlle. Smith recognizes her guide,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Victor Hugo. She is made happy by his arrival, and asks his protection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against the obsession of this new spirit. He answers that she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing to fear, that he will always be present. She is joyful at being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,guarded and protected by him, and feels that she has nothing to fear.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 2.—... “Leopold comes also, but Mlle. Smith fears nothing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,since her guide (Victor Hugo) is there to protect her.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 23.—... “An unpleasant evening. A spirit announces himself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is Leopold. He speaks to us at once: ‘I am here. I wish to be master
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this sitting.’ We are very much disappointed, and do not expect any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,good of him. He tries, as he had already done once before, to put Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith to sleep, who has great difficulty in struggling against this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sleep. She rises from the table, hoping by this means to rid herself of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him, and that he will give up his place to others. She returns in about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ten minutes, but he is still there, and apparently has no intention of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abandoning his place. We summon our friends (spiritual) to our aid....
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They take Leopold’s place momentarily, but very soon Leopold returns;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we struggle with him, we desire him to go away, but neither soft nor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hard words have any effect; before that dogged determination we realize
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that all our efforts will be useless, and we decide to close the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,October 3.—“[Manifestation by the favorite spirits of the group, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,declare] that they have not been able to come, as they would have liked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to do; that they were prevented by the spirit of Leopold, who is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trying to introduce himself to us; that we should repulse him as much
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as possible, persuaded that he does not come for any good end. I do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,know whether we shall be able to rid ourselves of him, but we greatly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fear that he will injure us and retard our advancement.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,October 7.—... “Leopold announces himself. We try to reason with him;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we do not wish to forbid his coming, but we ask of him that he shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,come as a friend to all, and not in the rôle of master. He is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,satisfied; appears to bear much malice. We trust he will come to have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,better feelings. He shows himself, walks around the table, bows to us,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and salutes each one with his hand, and retires again, leaving his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,place to others.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,October 14.—“[After a quarter of an hour of motionless and silent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waiting in darkness around the table Mlle. Smith is questioned, and she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is shaken in vain.] She is asleep. By the advice of persons present we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,allow her to remain asleep, when, at the end of five minutes, the table
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,raises itself, a spirit announces himself. It is Victor Hugo; we ask
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,if he has anything to say; he answers yes, and spells out: _Wake her;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not allow her ever to sleep_. We try to do so. We are nervous about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that sleep; we have great difficulty in awakening her.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,January 6, 1893.—“After twenty minutes of waiting, Leopold arrives,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and, as is his habit, puts the medium to sleep for some minutes; he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,torments us, and prevents our friends (disincarnate) from coming to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table. He vexes us in every way, and goes contrary to all our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wishes. In presence of that rancor the sitters regret the indications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of ill-humor they have shown towards him, and deplore having to pay so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dear for them. It is with difficulty that the medium can be awakened.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,February, 1893.—“In one of the seances of this month a remarkable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thing happened: the spirit of Leopold, who was very much irritated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on that day, twice in succession took away her chair from our medium
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and carried it to the farther end of the room, while Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fell heavily to the floor. Not expecting this wretched farce, Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith struck her knee so hard that for several days she suffered pain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in walking. We were obliged to terminate the seance; we were not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comfortable. Why this animosity?”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This word _animosity_ describes very well the conduct and the feelings
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Leopold seemed to have towards the N. group and against his placid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rival, Victor Hugo. The personal recollections of the sitters whom I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been able to interrogate confirm the substantial physiognomy of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the two figures. That of Hugo is, in effect, effaced and altogether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,eclipsed by the totally opposite character of the arrogant Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who takes a peculiar pleasure in the rôle of vindictive and jealous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mischief-maker, obstructing the appearance of the “spirits” desired by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the group, putting the medium to sleep, or causing her to fall on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,floor, forbidding her to give her heart to another, and breaking up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances as far as he is able. It seems to have finally resulted in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the meetings of the N. group coming to an end at the beginning of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,summer; then comes a break of six months, after which I find Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith on the 12th of December inaugurating a new series of seances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with an entirely different spiritistic group organized by Prof.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Cuendet. Here Victor Hugo very rarely appears, and never in the rôle of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,guide, which rôle is freely accorded, without objection, to Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whose real identity (Cagliostro) was no secret to any one in the new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment. It was, therefore, in the course of the year 1893, at a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,period which cannot be precisely determined from the records, that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the rivalry of these two personalities was terminated by the complete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,triumph of the second.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It follows from the preceding recital that the appearance of Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in seances of the N. group was a phenomenon of manifest contrast, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hostility, and of antagonism towards that group.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is a difficult and delicate task to pronounce upon the complex
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirit of an environment of which one was not a part, and in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which one possesses only a few and not very concordant incidents. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following, however, seem to be the facts:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The N. group, much more numerous than is convenient in seances of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that kind, was composed of very varied elements. Alongside of serious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believers were ordinarily some students who boarded with one of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ladies of the group, and who do not appear to have felt the seriousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of spiritistic reunions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,That age has no mercy, and the profound signification of the seances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often escaped their superficial and frivolous intelligence. Under such
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conditions Mlle. Smith was inevitably compelled to experience two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contrary impressions. On the one hand, she perceived herself admired,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made much of, fêted, as the unrivalled medium, which she really was,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and upon whom the group depended for its existence; on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, her secret instincts and high personal dignity could not but be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,offended by the familiarities to which she was exposed in this mixed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I regard the two rival and successive guides of Hélène as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,expression of this double sentiment. If she had been brought up like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an American woman, or if her nature had been a degree less fine, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frivolity of the seances would undoubtedly have only given more warmth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and brilliancy to Victor Hugo; instead of which, the victorious colors
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold are raised over a nature of great native pride, extremely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensitive on the point of feminine dignity, and whose severe and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rigid education had already exalted her sense of self-respect. After
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a struggle of a year between these two personifications of opposite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotional tendencies, the second, as we have seen, finally triumphs;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and Mlle. Smith withdraws from the N. group, which at the same time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,breaks up.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The idea I have formed of Leopold is now apparent. He represents,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to my mind, in Mlle. Smith, the synthesis, the quintessence—and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the expansion, too—of the most hidden springs of the psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,organism. He gushes forth from that deep and mysterious sphere into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the deepest roots of our individual existence are plunged,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which bind us to the species itself, and perhaps to the Absolute,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and whence confusedly spring our instincts of physical and moral
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,self-preservation, our sexual feelings. When Hélène found herself in an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment not exactly dangerous, but where she simply ran the risk,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as in the N. group, of yielding to some inclination contrary to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fundamental aspirations, it is then that Leopold suddenly springs up,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaking as the master, taking possession of the medium for himself,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and indicating his unwillingness that she should attach herself to any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one here below. We here recognize the same principle of self-protection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and self-preservation which was already active in her as a young girl
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the teleological automatisms arising on the occasion of certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotional shocks, of which I have spoken on p. 25.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But, by these considerations, we have travelled very far from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,original appearance of Leopold in the seance of the 26th of August,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1892, towards his actual, more ancient origin. This seems to date from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a great fright which Hélène had in the course of her tenth year. As
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she was walking along the street, on her way home from school, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was attacked by a big dog. The terror of the poor child can well be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagined, and from which she was happily delivered by a personage
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clothed in a long brown robe with flowing sleeves and with a white
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cross on the breast, who, appearing to her suddenly and as by a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,miracle, chased the dog away, and disappeared before she had time to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thank him. But, according to Leopold, this personage was no other than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself, who on this occasion for the first time appeared to Hélène,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and saved her by driving away the dog.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This explanation was given by Leopold on the 6th of October, 1895, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a seance in which Hélène experienced, in a somnambulistic state, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repetition of that scene of fright, with heart-rending cries, gestures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of struggle and defence, attempts at flight, etc. In the waking state
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she very well recalls this episode of her childhood, but cannot accept
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold as the person who came to her rescue, but believes it to have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been a priest or member of some religious order who rushed to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assistance and drove the animal away. Her parents also recollected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the incident, which she told them one day on returning from school in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a very excited state, and after which she could not for a long time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,encounter a dog in the street without hiding herself in the folds of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her mother’s dress. She has since always preserved an instinctive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aversion towards dogs.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We have seen (p. 31) that after this first incident, matters remained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_in statu quo_ for four years, up to the time when the age of puberty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,began to favor the development of the Oriental visions. Here, Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to whom we owe this information, does not altogether agree with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself, for at one time he says that it was he himself who furnished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith with her visions of India, at another time he says that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they are reminiscences of one of her former existences.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alongside of these varied visions, Leopold has clearly appeared under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the form of the protector in the dark robe in a number of cases. I will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only cite two examples, one very remote, the other quite recent.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One day Hélène went to consult her family physician for some trifling
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ailment, who, having known her for a long time and being an old friend
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her family, presumed to give her an innocent kiss. He was quite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unprepared for the explosion of wrath which this familiarity provoked,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and hastened to make his apologies: but what is of interest to us in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this connection is the fact that under the shock of this emotion her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,defender of the brown robe appeared before her in the corner of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,room, and did not leave her side until she had reached home.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A short time ago this same protector, always in the same costume,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied her several days in succession while she was traversing a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little-frequented part of the route towards her place of business. One
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evening, also, he appeared to her at the entrance to the street leading
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the locality in question, in the attitude of barring the way, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obliged her to make a detour to regain her house.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith has the impression—and several indications go to show that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she is not deceived—that it is with the purpose of sparing her some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unpleasant sight or a dangerous encounter that Leopold, in the brown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,robe, appears to her under perfectly well-known conditions. He rises
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before her always at a distance of about ten yards, walks, or rather
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,glides, along in silence, at the same rate as she advances towards him,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attracting and fascinating her gaze in such a manner as to prevent her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,turning her eyes away from him either to the right or the left, until
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she has passed the place of danger. It is to be noted that whereas
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, under other circumstances—for instance, at the seances—shows
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself to her in the most varied costumes and speaks on all subjects,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is always under his hieratic aspect, silent, and clothed in his long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dark robe, that he appears to her on those occasions of real life in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she is exposed to feelings of fright peculiar to her sex, as he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appeared to her on that first occasion in her tenth year.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The hints I have given sufficiently justify, I think, my opinion that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the real and primordial origin of Leopold is to be found in that deep
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and delicate sphere in which we so often encounter the roots of hypnoid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena, and to which the most illustrious visionaries, such as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Swedenborg,[8] seem to owe a great part not only of the intellectual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content but of the imaginative form, the hallucinatory wrapping, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their genius. There is a double problem to be solved in Mlle. Smith’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,case. Why have these instinctive feelings and emotional tendencies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which are common to the entire human race succeeded in developing in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her a product so complex and highly organized as is the personality of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold? and why, in the second place, does that personality believe
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself to be Joseph Balsamo?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I instantly reply that these two results are, to my mind, entirely the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,effect of autosuggestion. To explain the first, the simple fact of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being occupied with spiritism and engaged in mediumistic experiments,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is sufficient. Take any individual having in her subconsciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories, scruples, emotional tendencies, put into her head spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,leanings, then seat her at a table, or put a pencil in her hand:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,even though she may not be of a very impressionable or suggestible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,temperament, or inclined to the mental disintegration which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,general public calls the mediumistic faculty, nevertheless, it will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not be long before her subliminal elements group themselves and arrange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves according to the “personal” form to which all consciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tends,[9] and which discloses itself outwardly by communications which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have the appearance of coming directly from disincarnate spirits.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the case of Mlle. Smith, Leopold did not exist under the title of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a distinct secondary personality before Hélène began to be occupied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with spiritism. It was at the seances of the N. group, by an emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reaction against certain influences, as we have seen, that he began,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little by little, to take shape, aided by memories of the same general
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tone, until he finally grew into an apparently independent being,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revealing himself through the table, manifesting a will and a mind of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his own, recalling analogous former incidents of Hélène’s life, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,claiming for himself the merit of having intervened in it in the rôle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her protector.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Once established, this secondary self could not do otherwise than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to grow, and to develop and strengthen itself in all directions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assimilating to itself a host of new data favoring the state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestibility which accompanies the exercise of mediumship. Without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the spiritism and the autohypnotization of the seances, Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could never have been truly developed into a personality, but would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have continued to remain in the nebulous, incoherent state of vague
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal reveries and of occasional automatic phenomena.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The second problem, that of explaining why this secondary personality,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,once established, believes itself to be Cagliostro rather than any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other celebrated personage, or of remaining simply the anonymous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,guardian angel of Mlle. Smith, would demand a very complete knowledge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the thousand outside influences which have surrounded Hélène since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the beginning of her mediumship, and which may have involuntarily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,influenced her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But on this point I have only succeeded in collecting a very few
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incidents, which leave much still to be desired, and are of such a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character that it is entirely permissible for any one to claim that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the purely psychological origin of that personality is not clearly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,established, and to prefer, if he chooses, the actual intervention of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the disincarnate Joseph Balsamo to my hypothesis of autosuggestion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following, however, are the facts advanced by me in support of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latter:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The authoritative and jealous spirit, the evident enemy of the N.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,group, who manifested himself on the 26th of August, 1892, under the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,name of Leopold, did not reveal his identity as that of Cagliostro
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,until some time afterwards, under the following circumstances:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One of the most regular attendants at the reunions of the N. group
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was a Mme. B., who had long been an adherent of spiritism, and who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had previously attended numerous seances at the house of M. and Mme.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Badel, a thoroughly convinced couple of amateurs, now deceased, whose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_salon_ and round table have held a very honorable place in the history
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Genevese occultism. But I learned from Mme. B. that one of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnate spirits who manifested himself oftenest at the seances of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. and Mme. Badel was this very Joseph Balsamo. There is, indeed, no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,figure in history which accords better with the idea of a posthumous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,return to the mysteries of the round table than that of the enigmatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sicilian, especially since Alexandre Dumas, _père_, has surrounded him
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with an additional halo of romance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Not content with the public reunions of the N. group, Mme. B. often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,invited Hélène to her house for private seances, of which no record
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was made. At one of these, Hélène having had a vision of Leopold, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pointed out to her with a wand a decanter, Mme. B. suddenly thought
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a celebrated episode in the life of Cagliostro, and after the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance she proceeded to take from a drawer and show to Hélène an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,engraving taken from an illustrated edition of Dumas, representing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the famous scene of the decanter between Balsamo and the Dauphin at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the château of Taverney. At the same time she gave utterance to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea that the spirit who manifested himself at the table by means of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s hands was certainly Joseph Balsamo; and she expressed her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,astonishment that Hélène had given him the name of Leopold, to which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène replied that it was he himself who had given that name. Mme.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,B., continuing her deductions, told Mlle. Smith that perhaps she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,formerly been the medium of the great magician, and consequently had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been Lorenza Feliciani in a former life. Hélène at once accepted the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea, and for several weeks considered herself to be the reincarnation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Lorenza, until one day a lady of her acquaintance remarked that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was impossible, Lorenza Feliciani having never existed save in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagination and the romances of Alexandre Dumas, _père_.[10]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thus dispossessed of her supposed former existence, Hélène was not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long in declaring through the table that she was Marie Antoinette. As
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to Leopold, a short time after Mme. B. had hypothetically identified
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him with Cagliostro, he himself confirmed that hypothesis at a seance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the N. group, dictating to the table that his real name was Joseph
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Balsamo.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The origin of the name of Leopold is very obscure, and many hypotheses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been advanced to account for it without our being able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,establish any of them with certainty.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One fact, however, is certain, namely, that save for the vague
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affirmation that he had known Hélène in a previous existence, Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had never pretended to be Cagliostro, or given any reason for being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thought so, before the reunion where Mme. B., who had been for some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time accustomed to manifestations of that personage, announced the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposition and showed Mlle. Smith immediately after the seance (at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a moment when she was probably still in a very suggestible state) an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,engraving from Dumas’ works representing Balsamo and the Dauphin. From
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that day Leopold, on his part, never failed to claim that personality,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and progressively to realize the character of the rôle in a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarkable manner, as we shall see.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,II. PERSONIFICATION OF BALSAMO BY LEOPOLD
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is no need, I think, to remind the reader of the well-known
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fact—so often described under the names of objectivity of types,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personification, change of personality, etc.—that a hypnotized subject
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,can be transformed by a word into such other living being as may be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,desired, according to the measure in which his suggestibility on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one hand and the vividness of his imagination and the fulness of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stored-up knowledge or memories on the other, enables him to fulfil
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the rôle which is imposed upon him. Without investigating here to what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extent mediums may be likened to hypnotized subjects, it is undeniable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that an analogous phenomenon takes place in them; but the process is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more gradual, and may extend itself over several years. In place of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediate metamorphosis which modifies at one stroke and instantly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conformably to a prescribed type, the attitude, the physiognomy,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the gestures, the words, the intonations of voice, the style, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting, and other functions besides, we are, in the case of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium, in the presence of a development formed by successive stages
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arranged according to grades, with intervals of different lengths,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which finally succeed in creating a complete personality, all the more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,astonishing, at first sight, because the involuntary suggestions have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not been noticed, the accumulations of which have little by little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caused its birth. This process of development is present in a high
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,degree in the case of Mlle. Smith, in the elaboration of her secondary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality, Leopold-Cagliostro.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the beginning, in 1892 and 1893, this “spirit” only manifested
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself by the brief periods of sleep which he induced in Hélène at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain seances, by raps struck upon the table, by visions in which he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,showed himself clothed in black and of youthful appearance, and, more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rarely, by auditive hallucinations. His character and the content of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his messages were summed up in imperious, authoritative, domineering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manners, with the pretension of claiming Mlle. Smith all for himself,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of defending her against the influences of the N. group, and, finally,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of detaching her from that environment.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There was nothing, however, in this general character of monopoly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and of protection which specially recalled the Balsamo of history
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or of romance. The personification of complete objectivity of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,established type really began only in 1894, when Leopold had no longer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to struggle with an environment foreign to his nature. The subconscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological task of realization of the proposed model could then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be followed by him more freely; in spiritistic terms, Joseph Balsamo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was able to manifest himself and make himself known in a manner more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complete through Hélène as an intermediary, while continuing to follow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and protect her as the reincarnation of the royal object of his passion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At the seances held with M. Cuendet, Leopold frequently showed himself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to Hélène clothed after the fashion of the last century and with a face
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like that of Louis XVI., under the different phases of his multiplex
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,genius. He also showed himself to her in his laboratory, surrounded by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,utensils and instruments appropriate to the sorcerer and alchemist that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he was; or, again, as the physician and possessor of secret elixirs,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the knowledge of which is productive of consultations or remedies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for the use of sitters who need them; or, again, as the illumined
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,theosophist, the verbose prophet of the brotherhood of man, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,diffuses limping Alexandrine verses—which seem to have been inherited
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from his predecessor, Victor Hugo—containing exhortations a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weak at times, but always stamped with a pure moral tone, elevated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and noble sentiments, and a very touching religious spirit—in short,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a fine example of that “ethico-deific verbiage” (if I may be allowed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the expression, which is an Americanism), which, both in prose and in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verse, is one of the most frequent and estimable products of mediumship.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But it was not until 1895 that Leopold, benefiting by the progress made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the automatic phenomena in Hélène, multiplied and perfected his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,processes of communication. The first step consisted in substituting,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in his dictations by spelling, the movements of the hand or of a single
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finger for those of the whole table. This was the immediate result of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestion of mine.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 3. Handwriting of Leopold. Fragments of two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, letters, one in Alexandrine verse, the other in prose, entirely in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hand of Leopold, automatically written by Mlle. Smith in spontaneous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hemisomnambulism.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 4. Normal handwriting of Mlle. Smith.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The second step in advance was the handwriting, which shows two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stages. In the first, Leopold gave Hélène the impression of a phrase
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(verbo-visual hallucination), which she copied in pencil on a sheet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of paper, in her own handwriting. The second, which was only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accomplished five months later, and which consisted in writing directly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with Hélène’s hand, permitted the immediate establishment of three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious facts. One is, that Leopold holds his pen in the usual manner,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the handle resting between the thumb and the index-finger, while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, in writing, always holds her pen-handle or pencil between the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,index and middle fingers, a very rare habit with us. The next is that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold has an entirely different handwriting from that of Hélène, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,calligraphy more regular, larger, more painstaking, and with marked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,differences in the formation of the letters (see Figs. 3 and 4). The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,third is that he uses the style of handwriting of the last century, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,puts an _o_ instead of an _a_ in the tenses of the verbs, _j’amois_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for _j’amais_, etc. These three characteristics he has never departed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from during all the four years that I have been accumulating specimens
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of his handwriting.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following is a résumé of the seances at which these two innovations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,took place.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,April 21, 1895.—As I had just asked Leopold a question which he did not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like, Hélène, being in a state of hemisomnambulism, with a pencil and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some sheets of paper placed before her, in the hope of obtaining some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communication (not from Leopold), seemed about to plunge into a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interesting perusal of one of the blank sheets; then, at my request,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she with difficulty comprehended, she commenced to write rapidly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and nervously on another sheet, in her usual handwriting, a copy of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imaginary text which Leopold was showing her (“in fluid letters,” as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he said afterwards at the seance) as follows: “_My thoughts are not thy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thoughts, and thy wishes are not mine, friend Flournoy—Leopold._” At
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the final awakening Hélène recognized perfectly her own handwriting in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his phrase, but had no recollection of the occurrence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 22, 1895.—After different visions and some stanzas of Victor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hugo, dictated by the table, Hélène appeared to suffer considerably in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her right arm, which she was holding at the wrist with her left hand,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when the table at which she was seated gave out the following, dictated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by Leopold: “I shall hold her hand,” meaning that it was he, Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who was causing Mlle. Smith to suffer pain by seizing her right hand.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As she seemed to feel very badly and began to weep, Leopold was asked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to desist; but he refused, and, still speaking through the table,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,said, “Give her some paper,” then, “More light.” Writing material was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnished her and the lamp brought in, which Hélène gazed at fixedly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while Leopold continued to dictate (this time with the little finger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her left hand), “Let her gaze on the lamp until she forgets the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pain in her arm.” She then seemed, in fact, to forget her pain, and to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,find satisfaction in looking at the lamp; then she fastened her eyes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the paper, and seemed to read something there which she endeavored
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to copy in pencil. But here the right hand began a curious alternation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of contrary motions, expressing in a very clear manner a contest with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, who was trying to compel her to hold the pencil in a certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,way, which Hélène refused to do, with a great pretence of anger.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She persisted in holding it between the index and middle fingers, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was her wont, while Leopold wanted her to hold it in the usual way,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the thumb and the index-finger, and said: “I do not wish her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to ... she is holding the pencil very badly.” The right index-finger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then went through a very comical gymnastic performance, being seized
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with a tremor, which caused her to place it on one side or the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the pencil, according to whether it was Leopold or Hélène who was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,victorious; during this time she frequently raised her eyes, with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,look sometimes reproachful, sometimes supplicating, as if to gaze at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold standing by her side endeavoring to force her to hold the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pencil in the manner he preferred. After a contest of nearly twenty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,minutes, Hélène, vanquished and completely subdued by Leopold, seemed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be absent, while her hand, holding the pencil in the manner she did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not like, wrote slowly the two following lines, followed by a rapid and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feverish signature of Leopold:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Mes vers sont si mauvais que pour toi j’aurois dû
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Laisser à tout jamais le poète têtu.—LEOPOLD.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,An allusion, which was of no importance, to a remark made by me at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,commencement of the seance on the verses of Victor Hugo and those of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold frequently dictated by the table. The seance lasted some time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,longer; on awakening, Hélène vaguely remembered having seen Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but knew nothing more concerning the handwriting scene.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is a fact that while her other incarnations are always accomplished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passively and without any struggle, that of Leopold has the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiarity of regularly provoking more or less resistance on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part of Hélène. “I do not make of her all that I wish ... she is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,headstrong.... I do not know whether I shall succeed.... I do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe I can master her to-day....” replies he often when asked to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnate himself or write with her hand, and, indeed, his efforts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often fail. There exists between Hélène and her guide a curious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomenon of contrast and opposition, which only breaks out in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,higher and more recent forms of motor automatism, the handwriting,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the speech, or the complete incarnation, but from which the sensory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,messages and simple raps on the table or of the finger are free.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is very possible that the idea, very antipathetic to Hélène, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the hypnotizer mastering his subjects in spite of themselves—of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnated Cagliostro using his medium as a simple tool—has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subconsciously the origin of this constant note of revolt against
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the total domination of Leopold, and of the intense suffering which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied his first incarnations, and which has slowly diminished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through her becoming accustomed to the process, though it has never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been completely banished.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After the handwriting, in its turn came speech, which also was attained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by means of two stages. In a first attempt Leopold only succeeded
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in giving Hélène his intonation and pronunciation after a seance in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she suffered acutely in her mouth and in her neck, as though her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vocal organs were being manipulated or removed; she began to talk in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a natural tone, and was apparently wide awake and feeling well, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoke with a deep bass voice, and a strong, easily recognizable Italian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accent. It was not until a year later that Leopold was finally able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speak himself by the mouth of Mlle. Smith, while she was completely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entranced, and who did not retain on awakening any memory of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange occurrence. Since then the complete control of the medium
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by her guide is a frequent occurrence at the seances, and affords a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tableau very characteristic and always impressive.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold succeeds in incarnating himself only by slow degrees and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,progressive stages. Hélène then feels as though her arms had been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seized, or as if they were absent altogether; then she complains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of disagreeable sensations, which were formerly painful, in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,throat, the nape of her neck, and in her head; her eyelids droop;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her expression changes; her throat swells into a sort of double
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chin, which gives her a likeness of some sort to the well-known
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,figure of Cagliostro. All at once she rises, then, turning slowly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,towards the sitter whom Leopold is about to address, draws herself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up proudly, turns her back quickly, sometimes with her arms crossed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on her breast with a magisterial air, sometimes with one of them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hanging down while the other is pointed solemnly towards heaven, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with her fingers makes a sort of masonic sign, which never varies.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Soon after a series of hiccoughs, sighs, and various noises indicate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the difficulty Leopold is experiencing in taking hold of the vocal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparatus; the words come forth slowly but strong; the deep bass
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,voice of a man, slightly confused, with a pronunciation and accent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,markedly foreign, certainly more like Italian than anything else.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold is not always easily understood, especially when his voice
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,swells and thunders out a reply to some indiscreet question or to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disrespectful remarks of some skeptical sitter. He speaks thickly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pronounces _g_ like _j_, and all his _u’s_ like _ou_, accents the final
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,syllables, embellishes his vocabulary with obsolete words, or words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which do not fit the circumstances, such as _fiole_ for _bouteille_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_omnibus_ for _tramways_, etc. He is pompous, grandiloquent, unctuous,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes severe and terrible, sometimes also sentimental. He says
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“thee” and “thou” to everybody, and appears to believe that he is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,still grand-master of the secret societies, from the emphatic and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sonorous manner in which he pronounces the words “Brother” or “And
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thou, my sister,” by which he addresses the sitters. Although he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generally addresses himself to one of them in particular, and holds
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very little collective discourse, he is in touch with every one,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,listens to everything that is said, and each one may have his turn in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversation with him. Ordinarily he keeps his eyelids closed: he has,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nevertheless, been persuaded to open his eyes in order to permit the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taking of a photograph by a flash light. I regret that Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would not consent to the publication of her photographs, either in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,normal state or in that of Leopold, in connection with the reproduction
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a portrait of Cagliostro.[11] The reader may assure himself that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when she incarnates her guide she really assumes a certain resemblance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of features to him, and there is something in her attitude which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes somewhat theatrical, but sometimes really majestic, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corresponds well to the generally received idea of this personage,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whether he is regarded as a clever impostor or as a wonderful genius.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Speech is the apogee of the incarnations of Leopold; often interrupted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by fits of hiccoughs and spasms, it seems to be injurious to Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,organism, and there are some seances at which attempts to produce it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fail to succeed. Leopold, on these occasions, indicates his impotence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the fatigue of the medium by his gestures, and is then reduced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the necessity of expressing himself by digital dictations or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting, or else to giving Hélène verbo-auditive hallucinations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the content of which she repeats in her natural voice.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From the point of view of ease and mobility of the entire organism,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there is a notable difference between Leopold and the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnations of Hélène: these last seem to be effected with much more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facility than in the case of that of her guide _par excellence_. In
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the case of the Hindoo princess and that of Marie Antoinette, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perfection of the play, the suppleness and freedom of movement, are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always admirable. It is true there is no question here, according to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the spiritistic doctrine and the subconscious ideas of Mlle. Smith, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnations properly so called, since it is she herself who simply
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,returns to that which she formerly was, by a sort of reversion or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prenatal ecmnesia; she does not undergo, in consequence, any foreign
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possession, and can in these rôles preserve her natural identity and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the entire disposition of her faculties. But still the occasional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnation of different personalities, such as those of deceased
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,parents or friends of the spectators, are often more easily and quickly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,effected than that of Leopold. Hélène moves in these cases with more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vivacity and changes of attitude. In the rôle of Cagliostro, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other hand, with the exception of the grandiose and not very frequent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,movements of the arms, once standing, she remains motionless, or only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with difficulty advancing a little way towards the person to whom she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,addresses her discourse.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The content of the oral conversations of Leopold, as well as of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other messages by the various sensory and motor processes, is too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,varied for me to describe here: the numerous examples scattered through
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this work only can give an idea of it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,III. LEOPOLD AND THE TRUE JOSEPH BALSAMO
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It would naturally be supposed that Leopold would have given us,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by means of the psychological perfection of his partial or total
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnations and by the content of his messages, such a living likeness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Cagliostro that there would have been occasion to ask whether it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is not really the latter who actually “returns,” in the same way that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Dr. Hodgson and his colleagues ask themselves whether it is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,actually George Pelham who manifests himself through Mrs. Piper. Let
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us suppose, for example, that Leopold possessed a handwriting, an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,orthography, a style identical with that which is found here and there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the manuscripts of Joseph Balsamo; that he spoke French, Italian,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or German, as that cosmopolitan adventurer did, and with all the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiarities; that his conversations and messages were full of precise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,allusions to actual events in his life, and also of unpublished but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verifiable facts, etc. In that case the difficult and delicate task
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of proving that Mlle. Smith had no knowledge through normal methods
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these thousand exact features would still remain, and we should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not be forced to ask whether this _soi-disant_ authentic revenant is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simply a very well-gotten-up simulacrum, an admirable reconstruction,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a marvellous imitation, such as the subliminal faculties are only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,too glad to produce for the diversion of psychologists and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mystification of the simple.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This problem is not given to us. I regret it, but it is true,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nevertheless—to my mind, at least, for in these matters it is prudent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to speak only for one’s self—that there is no reason to suspect the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,real presence of Joseph Balsamo behind the automatisms of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,That there are very curious analogies between what is known to us of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Cagliostro and certain characteristic traits of Leopold, I do not deny,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but they are precisely such as accord very well with the supposition of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the subliminal medley.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 5. Handwriting of Joseph Balsamo. Fragment of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, letter to his wife, reproduced in _L’Isographie des Hommes célèbres_.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Let us consider first the handwriting. To facilitate the comparison, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have reproduced here (see pp. 109 and 111) some fragments of letters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Cagliostro and of Leopold and of Hélène. Let us suppose—which is,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perhaps, open to discussion—that the handwriting of Leopold, by its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regularity, its firmness, resembles that of Balsamo more than that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith; the degree of resemblance does not, I think, go beyond
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that which might be expected considering the notorious fact that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting reflects the psychological temperament and modifies itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in accordance with the state of the personality.[12]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is well known how the calligraphy of a hypnotized subject varies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to the suggestion that he shall personate Napoleon, Harpagon,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a little girl, or an old man; there is nothing surprising in the fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the hypnoid secondary personality of Hélène, which imagines
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself to be the powerful and manly Count of Cagliostro, should be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied by muscular tensions communicating to the handwriting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself a little of that solidity and breadth which are found in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,autograph of Balsamo. To this, however, the analogy is limited. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dissimilarities in the detail and the formation of the letters are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,such that the only conclusion which they warrant is that Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or her subconsciousness, has never laid eyes on the manuscripts of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Cagliostro. They are, indeed, rare, but the facilities she might have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had, of which she has not thought of taking advantage, for consulting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the Geneva public library the same volume from which I took Fig. 5,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would prove, at least, her good faith and her honesty, if it were in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the least necessary. The extravagant signature of Leopold with which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all his messages are subscribed (see Fig. 7) recalls in no wise that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alessandro di Cagliostro at the bottom of Fig. 5.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 6. Normal handwriting of Mlle. Smith.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 7. Handwriting of Leopold. Fragment and signature
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of one of his letters, written by Mlle. Smith, in spontaneous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hemisomnambulism.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The archaic forms of orthography, _j’aurois_ for _j’aurais_, etc.,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which appear above the first autograph of Leopold (see p. 99), and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which occur again in the messages of Marie Antoinette, constitute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a very pretty hit, of which the ordinary self would probably never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dream by way of voluntary imitation, but by which the subconscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagination has seen fit to profit. It is undoubtedly a matter for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wonderment that Mlle. Smith, who has not gone very deep into literary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,studies, should, nevertheless, have retained these orthographic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiarities of the eighteenth century; but we must not overlook
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the fineness of choice, the refined sensibility, the consummate,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,albeit instinctive, art which presides over the sorting and storing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,away of the subconscious memories. By some natural affinity, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea of a personage of a certain epoch attracts and gathers into its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,net everything that the subject can possibly learn or hear spoken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning the fashion of writing, of speaking, or acting, peculiar to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that epoch. I do not know whether Balsamo ever used the French language
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the orthography that Leopold employs. Even if he did, it would not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weaken the hypothesis of the subliminal imitation, but if, on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, it should be ascertained that he did not, the hypothesis would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be greatly strengthened thereby.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As for the speech, I am ignorant as to how, with what accent and what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiarities of pronunciation, Balsamo spoke the French tongue, and to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,what degree, in consequence, his reconstruction by Hélène’s subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fantasy correctly hits it. If this point could be cleared up, it would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probably be found to be just like that of the handwriting. Nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could be more natural than to ascribe to the _chevalier d’industrie_ of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Palermo a very masculine, deep-bass voice, and, it goes without saying,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as Italian as possible. It must be noted, too, that Mlle. Smith often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard her father speak that language, which he knew very well, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several of his friends; but that, on the other hand, she does not speak
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it, and has never learned it. Leopold, however, does not know Italian,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and turns a deaf ear when any one addresses him in that language. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intonation, the attitude, the whole physiognomy, in short, accord with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these remarks. As to the extremely varied content of the conversations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and messages of Leopold, we are not obliged to consider Balsamo as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their necessary author. When everything relating to Mlle. Smith and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters, but which has nothing to do with the last century, has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,swept aside, together with the spiritistic dissertations in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the “fluid” manner in which Leopold exists, perceives, and moves, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three subjects or categories of communications still remain, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,merit a rapid examination.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the first place, there are the answers of Leopold to the questions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,put to him concerning his terrestrial life. These answers are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarkably evasive or vague. Not a name, not a date, not a precise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fact does he furnish. We only learn that he has travelled extensively,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suffered greatly, studied deeply, done much good, and healed a great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,many sick folk; but now he sees things too lofty to think any more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about historic details of the past, and it is with unconcealed disgust
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or direct words of reproach for the idle curiosity of his carnal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questioners that he hastens to turn the conversation, like Socrates,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to moral subjects and those of a lofty philosophy, where he feels
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidently more at ease. When he is further pressed he becomes angry
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes, and sometimes ingenuously avows his ignorance, enveloping it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meanwhile in an air of profound mystery. “They are asking the secret of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my life, of my acts, of my thoughts. I cannot answer.” This does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facilitate investigation of the question of identity.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the second place come the consultations and medical prescriptions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold affects a lofty disdain for modern medicine and phenic acid.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He is as archaic in his therapeutics as in his orthography, and treats
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all maladies after the ancient mode. Baths of pressed grape-skins for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rheumatism, an infusion of coltsfoot and juniper-berry in white wine
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for inflammations of the chest, the bark of the horse-chestnut in red
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wine and douches of salt water as tonics, tisanes of hops and other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flowers, camomile, oil of lavender, the leaves of the ash, etc.; all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these do not accord badly with what Balsamo might have prescribed a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,century or more ago. The misfortune, from the evidential point of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,view, is that Mlle. Smith’s mother is extremely well versed in all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the resources of popular medicine where old recipes are perpetuated.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She has had occasion to nurse many sick people in her life, knows the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,virtues of different medicinal plants, and constantly employs, with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sagacity which I have often admired, a number of those remedies spoken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of as “old-women’s,” which make the young doctors fresh from the clinic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,smile, but to which they will more than once resort in secret after a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,few years of medical experience.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Finally, there still remain the sentiments of Leopold for Hélène, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he claims are only the continuation of those of Cagliostro for Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette. My ignorance of history does not permit me to pronounce
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,categorically on this point. That the Queen of France did have some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secret interviews with the famous “gold-maker,” due to simple curiosity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or to questions of material interest, there is no doubt, I believe; but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that his feelings for his sovereign were a curious combination of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,despairing passion of Cardinal Rohan for the queen, with the absolute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,respect which Alexandre Dumas, _père_, ascribes to Joseph Balsamo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,towards Lorenza Feliciani, appears to me less evident.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In short, if the revelations of Leopold have truly unveiled to us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shades of feeling of Count Cagliostro hitherto unsuspected, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of which later documentary researches shall confirm the historic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correctness—why, so much the better, for that will finally establish a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trace of the supernormal in the mediumship of Hélène!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,IV. LEOPOLD AND MLLE. SMITH
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The connection between these two personalities is too complex for a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,precise description. There is neither a mutual exclusion, as between
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mrs. Piper and Phinuit, who appear reciprocally to be ignorant of each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other and to be separated by the tightest of partitions; nor a simple
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,jointing, as in the case of Felida X., whose secondary state envelops
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and overflows the whole primary state. This is more of a crossing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of lines, but of which the limits are vague and with difficulty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assignable. Leopold knows, foresees, and recalls very many things of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the normal personality of Mlle. Smith knows absolutely nothing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not only of those which she may simply have forgotten, but of those of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she never had any consciousness. On the other hand, he is far
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from possessing all the memories of Hélène; he is ignorant of a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,great part of her daily life; even some very notable incidents escape
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him entirely, which explains his way of saying that, to his great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regret, he cannot remain constantly by her, being obliged to occupy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself with other missions (concerning which he has never enlightened
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us) which oblige him often to leave her for a time.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These two personalities are, therefore, not co-extensive; each one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passes beyond the other at certain points, without its being possible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for us to say which is, on the whole, the more extended. As to their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,common domain, if it cannot be defined by one word with entire
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certainty, it appears, nevertheless, to be chiefly constituted by its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connection with the innermost ranges of the being, both physiological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and psychological, as might be suspected from what I remarked above
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning the real origin of Leopold. Physician of the soul and of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,body, director of conscience, and at the same time hygienic counsellor,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he does not always manifest himself immediately, but he is always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present when Hélène’s vital interests are involved. This will be made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clearer by two or three concrete examples, which will at the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time illustrate some of the psychological processes by which Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manifests himself to Hélène.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It must be admitted that there is a disagreement and opposition as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complete as possible (but how far does this “possible” go?) when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, in at least an apparently waking state, converses with her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,guide, manifestly by a partial sensory or motor automatism; for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,example, in the case cited on page 64, where Leopold, not sharing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the allochiria of Hélène, declared by the table that she was wrong,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so emphatically that she protested and became angry; also, when in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verbo-auditive hallucinations, or by automatic handwriting, he enters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into discussion with her, and she holds her own with him; or, again,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when the organism seems to be divided up between two different persons,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold speaking by Hélène’s mouth, with his accent, and uttering his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,own ideas to her, and she complaining, in writing, of pains in her head
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and throat, without understanding their cause. Nevertheless, in these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cases of division of the consciousness, which appear to amount to its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cutting in two, it is doubtful whether this plurality is more than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparent. I am not positive of having ever established with Hélène a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,veritable simultaneity of different consciousnesses. At the very moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at which Leopold writes by her hand, speaks by her mouth, dictates
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the table, upon observing her attentively I have always found her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absorbed, preoccupied, as though absent; but she instantaneously
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovers her presence of mind and the use of her waking faculties at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the end of the motor automatism. In short, that which from the outside
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is taken for the coexistence of distinct simultaneous personalities
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seems to me to be only an alternation, a rapid succession between the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of Hélène-consciousness and the state of Leopold-consciousness;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and, in the case where the body seems to be jointly occupied by two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,independent beings—the right side, for instance, being occupied by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, and the left by Hélène, or the Hindoo princess—the psychical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,division has never seemed to me to be radical, but many indications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have combined to make me of the opinion that behind all was an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individuality perfectly self-conscious, and enjoying thoroughly, along
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the spectators, the comedy of the plural existences.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A single fundamental personality, putting the questions and giving
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the answers, quarrelling with itself in its own interior—in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,word, enacting all the various rôles of Mlle. Smith—is a fitting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interpretation, which accords very well with the facts as I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observed them in Hélène, and very much better than the theory of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plurality of separate consciousnesses, of a psychological polyzoism,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so to speak. This last theory is doubtless more convenient for a clear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and superficial description of the facts, but I am not at all convinced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it conforms to the actual condition of affairs.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is a state of consciousness _sui generis_, which it is impossible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adequately to describe, and which can only be represented by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,analogy of those curious states, exceptional in the normal waking life,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but less rare in dreams, when one seems to change his identity and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,become some one else.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène has more than once told me of having had the impression of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_becoming_ or _being_ momentarily Leopold. This happens most frequently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at night, or upon awakening in the morning. She has first a fugitive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision of her protector; then it seems that little by little he is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,submerged in her; she feels him overcoming and penetrating her entire
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,organism, as if he really became her or she him. These mixed states
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are extremely interesting to the psychologist; unhappily, because they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generally take place in a condition of consecutive amnesia, or because
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the mediums do not know how, or do not wish, to give a complete account
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of them, it is very rare that detailed descriptions are obtained.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Between the two extremes of complete duality and complete unity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,numerous intermediate states are to be observed; or, at least, since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the consciousness of another cannot be directly penetrated, these mixed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,states may be inferred from the consequences which spring from them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It has happened, for example, that, believing they were dealing with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold alone, thoroughly incarnated and duly substituted for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality of Mlle. Smith, the sitters have allowed to escape them on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that account some ill-timed pleasantry, some indiscreet question or too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,free criticisms, all innocent enough and without evil intention, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,still of a nature to wound Hélène if she had heard them, and from which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the authors would certainly have abstained in her presence in a waking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold has not stood upon ceremony in putting down these imprudent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,babblers, and the incident, generally, has had no further consequences.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But sometimes the words and bearing of Mlle. Smith for days or weeks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,afterwards show that she was aware of the imprudent remarks, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proves that the consciousness of Leopold and her own are not separated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by an impenetrable barrier, but that osmotic changes are effected from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the one to the other. It is ordinarily pointed and irritating remarks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which cause the trouble, which goes to prove that it is the feelings
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of self-love or personal susceptibility that form in each one of us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the inmost fortifications of the social self, and are the last to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,destroyed by somnambulism, or that they constitute the fundamental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,substratum, the common base by which Leopold and Mlle. Smith form a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole and mingle themselves in the same individuality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The psychological process of this transmission is varied from another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cause. Sometimes it appears that the consecutive amnesia of the trance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has been broken as to the most piquant details, and that Hélène clearly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remembers that which has been said, in the presence of Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disagreeable to herself. Sometimes it is Leopold himself who repeats to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her the unpleasant expressions which have been used, with commentaries
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,calculated to lessen their effect and to excuse the culprits: for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is an interesting trait of his character that he undertakes with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène the defence of those same persons whom he reprimands and blames,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a contradiction not at all surprising when it is psychologically
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interpreted, considering the habitual conflict of emotional motives or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tendencies, the warfare which opposite points of view is incessantly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,carrying on in our inmost being. Sometimes, again, it is in a dream
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the junction is effected between the somnambulistic consciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold and the normal consciousness of Hélène.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Apropos of the last case, here is an example containing nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disagreeable, in which Hélène remembered in her waking state a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nocturnal dream, which was itself a repetition or echo, in natural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sleep, of a somnambulistic scene of the previous evening.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a seance at which I assisted, shortly after my recovery from an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attack of congestion of the lungs, Hélène, completely entranced,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has a vision of Leopold-Cagliostro, who, in the rôle of sympathetic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,physician, comes to hold a consultation with me. After some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preliminaries she kneels down by my chair, and, looking alternately at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my chest and at the fictitious doctor standing between us, she holds a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long conversation with him, in which she explains the condition of my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lungs, which she sees in imagination, and the treatment which Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prescribes, somewhat as follows:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“ ... It is the lungs ... it is darker ... it is one side which has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been affected.... You say that it is a severe inflammation—and can that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be healed?... Tell me, what must be done.... Oh, where have I seen any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these plants?... I don’t know what they are called ... those ... I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,don’t understand very well ... those synantherous?... Oh, what a queer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,name.... Where are they to be found?... You say it belongs to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,family of ... then it has another name? Tell me what it is ... some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_tissulages_ [sic].... Then you think this plant is good for him?...
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Ah! but explain this to me ... the fresh leaves or the dried flowers?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Three times a day, a large handful in a pint ... and then honey and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,milk.... I will tell him that he must drink three cups a day....”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. Then followed very detailed directions as to treatment, various
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,infusions, blisters, etc. The whole scene lasted more than an hour,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,followed by complete amnesia, and nothing was said to Hélène about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it, as it was half-past six in the evening, and she was in haste to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,return home. The next day she wrote me a seven-page letter in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she described a very striking dream she had had during the night.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“... I fell asleep about two o’clock in the morning and awaked at about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,five. Was it a vision? Was it a dream I had? I don’t really know what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to consider it and dare not say; but this I do know, I saw my dear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,friend Leopold, who spoke to me a long time about you, and I think I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saw you also. I asked him what he thought of your state of health....
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He replied that in his opinion it was far from re-established. That the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pain you feel in the right side came from an inflammation of the lung
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which has been seriously affected.... You will doubtless laugh when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I tell you that he also described the remedies you ought to take....
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One of them is a simple plant, which is called, as nearly as I can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remember, Tissulage or Tussilache, but has also another name, which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cannot recollect, but the first name will doubtless suffice, since he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,says you are familiar with the plant ...” etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,What I have said concerning Leopold is also applicable to the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personifications of Mlle. Smith. The normal consciousness of Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mingles and fuses itself in every way with the somnambulistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness of Simandini, of Marie Antoinette, or some other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnation, as we shall soon see. I pass now to the examination of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some detailed examples, destined to throw light upon the rôle which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold plays in Hélène’s existence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Let us begin by listening to Leopold himself. Among his numerous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,messages, the following letter, written in his fine handwriting by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand of Mlle. Smith—in response to a note in which I had begged him
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(as a spiritual being and distinct from her) to aid me in my “psychic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,researches”—contains information for which I had not asked, but which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was none the less interesting. It must not be forgotten that it is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnate adorer of Marie Antoinette who is writing:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “FRIEND,—I am pleased and touched by the mark of confidence you have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, deigned to accord me. The spiritual guide of Mademoiselle [Smith],
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, whom the Supreme Being in his infinite goodness has permitted me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, to find again with ease, I do all I can to appear to her on every
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, occasion when I deem it necessary; but my body, or, if you prefer,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the matter of little solidity of which I am composed, does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, always afford me the facility of showing myself to her in a positive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, human manner. [He, in fact, appeared to her often under the form of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, elementary visual hallucinations, a luminous trail, whitish column,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, vaporous streamer, etc.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “That which I seek above all to inculcate in her is a consoling and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, true philosophy, which is necessary to her by reason of the profound,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, unhappy impressions, which even now still remain to her, of the whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, drama of her past life. I have often sown bitterness in her heart
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [when she was Marie Antoinette], desiring only her welfare. Also,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, laying aside everything superfluous, I penetrate into the most hidden
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, recesses of her soul, and with an extreme care and incessant activity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, I seek to implant there those truths which I trust will aid her in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, attaining the lofty summit of the ladder of perfection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Abandoned by my parents from my cradle, I have, indeed, known sorrow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, early in life. Like all, I have had many weaknesses, which I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, expiated, and God knows that I bow to His will!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Moral suffering has been my principal lot. I have been full of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, bitterness, of envy, of hatred, of jealousy. Jealousy, my brother!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, what a poison, what a corruption of the soul!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Nevertheless, one ray has shone brightly into my life, and that ray
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, so pure, so full of everything that might pour balm on my wounded
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, soul, has given me a glimpse of heaven!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Herald of eternal felicity! Ray without spot! God deemed best to take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, it before me! But to-day it is given back to me! May His holy name be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, blessed!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Friend, in what manner shall I reply to you? I am ignorant myself,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, not knowing what it will please God to reveal to you, but through her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, whom you call Mademoiselle [Smith], God willing, perhaps we shall be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, able to satisfy you.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  “Thy friend,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  “LEOPOLD.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We can see, under the flowing details of the spiritistic ideas and his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rôle as the repentant Cagliostro, that the dominant characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold is his deep platonic attachment for Mlle. Smith, and an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ardent moral solicitude for her and her advance towards perfection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This corresponds perfectly with the character of the numerous messages
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which he addresses to her in the course of her daily existence, as may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be seen from the following specimen. He is referring to a case where,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after having warned her on two occasions during the day by auditive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinations that he would manifest himself in the evening, he gives
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her, in fact, by automatic writing in his own hand, the encouragement
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she was actually in need of under the circumstances in which she found
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One morning, at her desk, Hélène heard an unknown voice, stronger and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nearer to her than is usual with Leopold, say to her: “_Until this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evening_”; a little later the same voice, which she now recognized as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of Leopold, but of a quality rougher and nearer to her than was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his habit, said to her: “_You understand me well, until this evening._”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the evening, having returned home, she was excited at supper, left
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table in haste towards the end of the meal, and shut herself up in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her room with the idea that she would learn something; but, presently,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the instinctive agitation of her hand indicated to her that she should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,take her pencil, and having done so, she obtained in the beautiful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,calligraphy of Leopold the following epistle. (She says that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remained wide awake and self-conscious while writing it, and it is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only occasion of a similar character when she had knowledge of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “MY BELOVED FRIEND,—Why do you vex yourself, torment yourself so? Why
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, are you indignant, because, as you advance in life, you are obliged to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, acknowledge that all things are not as you had wished and hoped they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, might be? Is not the route we follow on this earth always and for all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of us strewn with rocks? is it not an endless chain of deceptions, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, miseries? Do me the kindness, my dear sister, I beg of you, to tell me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, that from this time forth you will cease from endeavoring to probe too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, deeply the human heart. In what will such discoveries aid you? What
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, remains to you of these things, except tears and regrets? And then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, this God of love, of justice, and of life—is not He the one to read
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, our hearts? It is for Him, not for thee, to see into them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Would you change the hearts? Would you give them that which they have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, not, a live, ardent soul, never departing from what is right, just,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and true? Be calm, then, in the face of all these little troubles. Be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, worthy, and, above all, always good! In thee I have found again that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, heart and that soul, both of which will always be for me all my life,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, all my joy, and my only dream here below.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Believe me: be calm: reflect: that is my wish.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  “Thy friend,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  “LEOPOLD.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have chosen this example for the sake of its brevity. Hélène has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,received a number of communications of the same kind, sometimes in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verse, in which the moral and religious note is often still more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accentuated. In the greater part we meet with, as in the next to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last phrase of the foregoing letter, an allusion to the presumed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affection of Cagliostro for Marie Antoinette. It is to be noticed that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there is nothing in these excellent admonitions that a high and serious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,soul like that of Mlle. Smith could not have drawn from its own depths
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a moment of contemplation and meditation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Is it a benefit or an injury to the moral and truly religious life to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,formulate itself thus clearly in verbal hallucinations rather than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to remain in the confused but more personal state of experienced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aspirations and strongly expressed emotions? Do these inspirations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gain or lose in inward authority and subjective power by assuming this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exterior garb and this aspect of objectivity? This is a delicate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,question, probably not susceptible of a uniform solution.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the following incident, which I relate as an example among many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other similar ones, it is no longer, properly speaking, the moral and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,religious sentiments personified in Leopold, but rather the instinct
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of reserve and of defence peculiar to the weaker sex, the sense of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proprieties, the self-respect, tinctured with a shade of exaggeration
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,almost amounting to prudery.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a visit to Mlle. Smith, during which I inquired whether she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,received any recent communications from Leopold, she told me she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only seen him two or three times in the last few days, and had been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,struck by his “restless and unhappy” air, instead of the air “so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pleasant, so sweet, so admirable,” which he generally has. As she did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not know to what to attribute this change of countenance, I advised her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to take her pencil and to wrap herself in meditation, with the hope of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtaining some automatic message.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In about a minute her expression indicated that she was being taken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possession of; her eyes were fixed on the paper, upon which her left
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand rested, the thumb and little finger being agitated and continually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tapping (about once a second), the right hand having tried to take the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pencil between the index and middle finger (the manner of Hélène),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ended by seizing it between the thumb and the index finger, and traced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slowly in the handwriting of Leopold:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Yes, I am restless | pained, even in anguish. | Believest thou,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,friend, that it is with satisfaction | that I see you every day
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accepting the attentions, the flatteries; | I do not call them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,insincere, but of little worth, and little praiseworthy | on the part
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of those from whom they come.” |
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This text was written at six separate times (marked by the vertical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bars), separated by brief moments of full wakefulness, when the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tappings of the left hand ceased, and when Hélène, repeating in a loud
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,voice what she was about to write, is very much astonished, does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,know to what Leopold alludes, then at my request takes her pencil to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtain an explanation, and falls asleep again during the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fragment. At the end of this bit, as she persists in saying that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is ignorant of what he refers to, I proceed to question Leopold, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,replies that for several days Hélène has permitted herself to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,courted by a M. V. (perfectly honorably), who often found himself on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same street-car with her, had made a place for her beside him the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last few mornings, and had paid her some compliments on her appearance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These revelations excited the laughter and protestations of Hélène, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,commenced to deny that it could have come from Leopold, and accused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me of having suggested it to her little finger; but the right hand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,took the pencil and traced these words in the handwriting and with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signature of Leopold: “I only say what I think, and I desire that you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refuse henceforth all the flowers that he may offer you.—Leopold.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This time Hélène remembered the incident, and recollected that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,yesterday morning he had offered her a rose which he was wearing as a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,boutonnière.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Eight days later I paid another visit to Hélène, and after an effort
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to secure some handwriting, which was not successful, but resulted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a Martian vision (see Martian text No. 14), she had a visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucination of Leopold, and losing consciousness of the actual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment and of my presence also, as well as that of her mother,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she flung herself into a running conversation with him in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the incident of eight days previously: “Leopold ... Leopold ... don’t
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,come near me [repulsing him]. You are too severe, Leopold!... Will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,you come on Sunday? I am going to be at M. Flournoy’s next Sunday.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,You will be there ... but take good care that you do not.... No, it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is not kind of you always to disclose secrets.... What must he have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thought?... You seem to make a mountain out of a mole-hill.... And
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who would think of refusing a flower? You don’t understand at all....
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Why, then? It was a very simple thing to accept it, a matter of no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,importance whatever ... to refuse it would have been impolite.... You
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pretend to read the heart.... Why give importance to a thing that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,amounts to nothing?... It is only a simple act of friendship, a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,token of sympathy ... to make me write such things on paper before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,everybody! not nice of you!” In this somnambulistic dialogue, in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we can divine Leopold’s replies, Hélène took for the moment the accent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Marie Antoinette (see below, in the “Royal cycle”). To awaken her,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, who had possession of Hélène’s arms, made some passes over
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her forehead, then pressed the frontal and suborbital nerves of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,left side, and made me a sign to do the same with those of the right.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The seance of the next day but one, at my house, passed without any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,allusion by Leopold to the incident of the street-car, evidently on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,account of the presence of certain sitters to whom he did not wish to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reveal Hélène’s secrets. But, three days after, in a new visit, during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she told me of having had a waking discussion concerning the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,future life (without telling me with whom), she again wrote, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand of Leopold: “It is not in such society as this that you ought so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seriously to discuss the immortality of the soul.” She then confessed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it was again on the street-car, and with M. V., that she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,held that conversation while a funeral procession was passing. There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was never anything that might have been of a compromising character
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the exchange of courtesies and the occasional conversations of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith with her neighbor of the street-car. The trouble that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caused poor Leopold was very characteristic of him, and well indicated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the severe and jealous censor who formerly had worried the N. group;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there can be heard again the echo of that voice, “which has absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing to do with the conscience” (see pp. 27 and 82), and which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has hitherto prevented Hélène from accepting any of the suitors whom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she has encountered in the course of her journey through life. This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,austere and rigorous mentor, always wide awake, and taking offence at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the least freedom which Mlle. Smith allows herself in the exchange of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trifling courtesies, represents, in fact, a very common psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attribute; it is not every well-bred feminine soul that carries stored
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in one of its recesses, where it manifests its presence by scruples
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more or less vaguely felt, certain hesitations or apprehensions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inhibiting feelings or tendencies of a shade of intensity varying
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to the age and the temperament.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is not my part to describe this delicate phenomenon. It suffices
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me to remark that here, as in the ethico-religious messages, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality of Leopold has in no way aided the essential content of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those inward experiences of which Mlle. Smith is perfectly capable by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself; the form only of their manifestation has gained in picturesque
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and dramatic expression in the _mise-en-scène_ of the automatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwritings and of the somnambulistic dialogue. It seems as though the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestive approach of my presence and my questions had been necessary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to excite these phenomena; it is, however, very probable, to judge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from other examples, that my influence only hastened the explosion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold in formulated reproaches, and that his latent discontent,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hitherto noticed in the “restless and suffering air” of his fugitive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visual apparitions, would have terminated, after a period of incubation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more or less prolonged, in breaking out into spontaneous admonitions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,auditive or written.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It can be divined that in this rôle of vigilant guardian, of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,almost excessive zealousness for the honor or the dignity of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith, Leopold is again, to my mind, only a product of psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,duplication. He represents a certain grouping of inward desires and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secret instincts, which the hypnoid predisposition, encouraged by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism, has brought into a peculiar prominence and given an aspect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of foreign personality; in the same way, in the phantasmagoria of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dream, certain after-thoughts, almost unperceived while awake, rise to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first plane and become transformed into contradictory fictitious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages, whose cutting reproaches astonish us sometimes on awakening
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by their disturbing truthfulness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A final example will show us Leopold, in his rôle of watcher over the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,health of Mlle. Smith and adviser of precautions which she ought to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,take. He is not troubled about her general health; when she had _la
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grippe_, for instance, or when she is simply worn out with fatigue,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he scarcely shows himself. His attention is concentrated upon certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,special physiological functions, of the normal exercise of which he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,takes care to be assured. He does not otherwise seem to exercise a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,positive action upon them, and cannot modify them in any way; his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,office seems to be confined to knowing beforehand their exact course,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and to see that Hélène is not guilty of any imprudence which may impede
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold here shows a knowledge and prevision of the most intimate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena of the organism which has been observed in the case of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secondary personalities, and which confers upon them, in that respect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at least, an unquestionable advantage over the ordinary personality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the case of Mlle. Smith, the indications of her guide are always of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a prohibitive nature, calculated to prevent her from talking part in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritistic reunions at a time at which she believes herself able to do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so with impunity, but which he, endowed with a more refined cœnæsthetic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensibility, thinks she ought not to undertake. He has for several
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years formally laid his ban upon every kind of mediumistic exercises at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain very regular periods.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He has also on numerous occasions compelled her by various messages,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,categorical auditive hallucinations, diverse impulses, contractures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the arms, forcing her to write, etc., to modify her plans and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to abandon seances already arranged. This is a very clear form of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,teleological automatism.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As a specimen of this spontaneous and hygienic intervention of Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the life of Hélène, I have selected the letter given below, because
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it combines several interesting traits. It well depicts the energy with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Mlle. Smith is compelled to obey her guide.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The passage from the auditive to the graphic form of automatism is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also to be noticed in it. Apropos of this, in the page of this letter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reproduced in Fig. 8 (see p. 137), it is made clear that the transition
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the hand of Hélène to that of Leopold is accomplished brusquely and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a decided manner. The handwriting is not metamorphosed gradually,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slowly, but continues to be that of Mlle. Smith, becoming more and more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agitated, it is true, and rendered almost illegible by the shocks to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the arm of which Leopold takes hold up to the moment when, suddenly and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by a bound, it becomes the well-formed calligraphy of Cagliostro.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  “_January 29_, 6.15 A.M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “MONSIEUR,—I awoke about ten minutes ago, and heard the voice of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Leopold telling me in a very imperious manner, ‘Get up out of your
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, bed, and quickly, very quickly, write to your dear friend, M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Flournoy, that you will not hold a seance to-morrow, and that you will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, not be able to go to his house for two weeks, and that you will not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hold any seance within that period.’ I have executed his order, having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, felt myself forced, compelled in spite of myself, to obey. I was so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, comfortable in bed and so vexed at being obliged to write you such a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, message; but I feel myself forced to do what he bids me.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “At this moment I am looking at my watch; it is 6.25 o’clock. I feel
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, a very strong shock in my right arm—I might better speak of it as an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, electric disturbance—and which I perceive has made me write crooked. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hear also at this instant the voice of Leopold. I have much difficulty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in writing what he tells me: ‘6.42½. Say to him this: _I am, sir,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, always your very devoted servant, in body and mind, healthy and not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, unbalanced._’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “I stopped for some moments after writing these words, which I saw
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, very well, after having written them, were in the handwriting of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Leopold. Immediately afterwards, a second disturbance, similar to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the first, gave me a fresh shock, this time from my feet to my head.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, It all passed so quickly that I am disturbed and confused by it. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, is true that I am not yet quite well. Is this the reason why Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, prevents my going to Florissant to-morrow? I do not know, but,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, nevertheless, am anxious to follow his advice....”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith always submits obediently to the commands of her guide,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,since, whenever she has transgressed them, through forgetfulness or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,neglect, she has had cause to repent it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is clear that in this rôle of special physician of Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always _au courant_ of her state of health, Leopold could easily be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interpreted as personifying those vague impressions which spring forth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,continually from the depths of our physical being, informing us as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,what is passing there.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A neuralgic toothache is felt in a dream hours before it makes itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,felt in our waking consciousness, while some maladies are often thus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,foreshadowed several days before they actually declare themselves. All
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,literature is full of anecdotes of this kind; and the psychiatrists
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have observed that in the form of circular alienation, where phases of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,melancholic depression and maniacal excitation alternately succeed one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,another more or less regularly with intervals of normal equilibrium,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is frequently in sleep that the first symptoms of the change of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,humor can be detected which has already begun in the depths of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individuality, but will only break forth on the outside a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,later. But all the hypnoid states are connected, and it is not at all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprising that, in the case of a subject inclined to automatism,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these confused presentiments should arise with the appearance of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,foreign personality which is only a degree higher than the process of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dramatization already so brilliantly at work in our ordinary dreams.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 8. A page from a letter of Mlle. Smith, showing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the spontaneous irruption of the personality and the handwriting of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Leopold during the waking state of Hélène.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It will be useless to lengthen or further multiply examples of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intervention of Leopold in the life of Mlle. Smith. Those which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have given show him under his essential aspects, and suffice to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,justify Hélène’s confidence in a guide who has never deceived her, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has always given her the best counsel, delivered discourses of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,highest ethical tone, and manifested the most touching solicitude for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her physical and moral health. It is easy to understand that nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,can shake her faith in the real, objective existence of this precious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,counsellor.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is really vexatious that the phenomena of dreams should be so little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observed or so badly understood (I do not say by psychologists, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the general public, which prides itself on its psychology), since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the dream is the prototype of spiritistic messages, and holds the key
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the explanation of mediumistic phenomena. If it is regrettable to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,see such noble, sympathetic, pure, and in all respects remarkable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personalities as Leopold reduced to the rank of a dream creation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it must be remembered, however, that dreams are not always, as idle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,folk think, things to be despised or of no value in themselves: the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,majority are insignificant and deserve only the oblivion to which they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are promptly consigned. A very large number are bad and sometimes even
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,worse than reality; but there are others of a better sort, and “dream”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is often a synonym for “ideal.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To sum up, Leopold certainly expresses in his central nucleus a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,honorable and attractive side of the character of Mlle. Smith, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in taking him as her “guide” she only follows inspirations which are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probably among the best of her nature.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                               CHAPTER V
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                           THE MARTIAN CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The title of this book would naturally commit me to a review of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo romance before investigating the Martian cycle. Considerations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of method have caused me to reverse this order. It is better to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,advance from the simple to the complex, and while we certainly know
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,less concerning the planet Mars than of India, the romance which it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has inspired in the subliminal genius of Mlle. Smith is relatively
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,less difficult to explain than the Oriental cycle. In fact, the former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seems to spring from pure imagination, while in the latter we meet with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain actual historical elements, and whence Hélène’s memory and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intelligence have gained a knowledge of them is an extremely difficult
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,problem for us to solve. There is, then, only _one_ faculty at work in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian romance, as a professional psychologist would say, while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Oriental cycle calls several into play, making it necessary to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,treat of it later, on account of its greater psychological complexity.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While the unknown language which forms the vehicle of many of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian messages cannot naturally be dissociated from the rest of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cycle, it merits, nevertheless, a special consideration, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following chapter will be entirely devoted to it. It does not figure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the present chapter, in which I shall treat of the origin and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content only of the Martian romance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I. ORIGIN AND BIRTH OF THE MARTIAN CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“We dare to hope,” says M. Camille Flammarion, at the beginning of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his excellent work on the planet Mars, “that the day will come when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scientific methods yet unknown to us will give us direct evidences of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the existence of the inhabitants of other worlds, and at the same time,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also, will put us in communication with our brothers in space.”[13]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,And on the last page of his book he recurs to the same idea, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,says: “What marvels does not the science of the future reserve for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our successors, and who would dare to say that Martian humanity and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,terrestrial humanity will not some day enter into communication with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,each other?”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This splendid prospect seems still far off, along with that of wireless
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telegraphy, and almost an Utopian dream, so long as one holds strictly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the current conceptions of our positive sciences. But break these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,narrow limits; fly, for example, towards the illimitable horizon which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism opens up to its happy followers, and as soon as this vague
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hope takes shape, nothing seems to prevent its immediate realization;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the only cause for wonder is found in the fact that no privileged
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium has yet arisen to have the glory, unique in the world, of being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first intermediary between ourselves and the human inhabitants
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of other planets; for spiritism takes no more account of the barrier
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of space than of time. The “gates of distance” are wide open before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it. With it the question of means is a secondary matter; one has only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the embarrassment of making a choice. It matters not whether it be by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intuition, by clairvoyance, by telepathy, or by double personality that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the soul is permitted to leave momentarily its terrestrial prison and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make the voyage between this world and others in an instant of time,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or whether the feat is accomplished by means of the astral body, by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the reincarnation of disincarnate omnisciences, by “fluid beings,”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or, in a word, by any other process whatever. The essential point is,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to spiritism, that no serious objection would be offered
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the possibility of such communication. The only difficulty would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be to find a mediumistic subject possessing sufficient psychical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculties. It is a simple question of fact; if such a one has not yet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been found, it is apparently only because the time is not yet ripe.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But now that astronomers themselves appeal to those “unknown methods
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of actual science” to put us _en rapport_ with other worlds, no doubt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism—which is the science of to-morrow, as definite as absolute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,religion—will soon respond to these legitimate aspirations. We may,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,therefore, expect at any moment the revelation so impatiently looked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for, and every good medium has the right to ask herself whether she is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not the being predestined to accomplish this unrivalled mission.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These are the considerations which, to my mind, in their essential
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content inspired in the subliminal part of Mlle. Smith the first idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her Martian romance. I would not assert that the passages from M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Flammarion which I have quoted came directly to the notice of Hélène,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but they express and recapitulate wonderfully well one of the elements
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the atmosphere in which she found herself at the beginning of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumship. For if there are no certain indications of her ever having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,read any work on the “heavenly worlds” and their inhabitants, either
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of M. Flammarion or of any other author, she has, nevertheless,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard such subjects discussed. She is perfectly familiar with the name
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the celebrated astronomical writer Juvisy, and knows something of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his philosophical ideas, which, by-the-way, is not at all surprising
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when we consider the popularity he enjoys among spiritists, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,find in him a very strong scientific support for their doctrine of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reincarnation on other planets.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I also have evidence that in the circle of Mme. N., of which Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was a member in 1892, the conversation more than once turned in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,direction of the habitability of Mars, to which the discovery of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,famous “canals” has for some years specially directed the attention
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the general public. This circumstance appears to me to explain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sufficiently the fact that Hélène’s subliminal astronomy should be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerned with this planet. It is, moreover, quite possible that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first germs of the Martian romance date still further back than the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning of Hélène’s mediumship. The Oriental rôle shows indications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of concerning itself with that planet, and the very clear impression
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she has of having in her childhood and youth experienced many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions of a similar kind “without her noticing them particularly,”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives rise to the supposition that the ingredients of which this cycle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is composed date from many years back. Possibly they may have one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the same primitive source in the exotic memories, descriptions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or pictures of tropical countries which later branched out under the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vigorous impulsion of spiritistic ideas in two distinct currents, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo romance on the one side and the Martian on the other, whose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waters are mingled on more than one occasion afterwards.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While, on the whole, therefore, it is probable that its roots extend
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,back as far as the childhood of Mlle. Smith, it is nevertheless with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian romance, as well as with the others, not a mere question
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the simple cryptomnesiac return of facts of a remote past, or of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an exhumation of fossil residua brought to light again by the aid of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism. It is a very active process, and one in full course of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evolution, nourished, undoubtedly, by elements belonging to the past,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but which have been recombined and moulded in a very original fashion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,until it amounts finally, among other things, to the creation of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown language. It will be interesting to follow step by step the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phases of this elaboration: but since it always, unfortunately, hides
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself in the obscurity of the subconsciousness, we are only cognizant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of it by its occasional appearances, and all the rest of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subterranean work must be inferred, in a manner somewhat hypothetical,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from those supraliminal eruptions and the scanty data which we have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning the outward influences which have exerted a stimulating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,influence upon the subliminal part of Hélène. It was in 1892, then,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the conversations took place which were to prepare the soil for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this work of lofty subliminal fantasy, and planted in Hélène’s mind the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,double idea, of enormous scientific interest, that she could enter into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,direct relation with the inhabitants of Mars, and of the possibility,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unsuspected by scientists, but which spiritism furnishes us, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reaching there by a mediumistic route. I doubt, however, whether that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vague suggestion on the part of the environment would have sufficed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to engender the Martian dream—since for more than two years no sign
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of its eruption manifested itself—without the intervention of some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fillip more concrete, capable of giving a start to the whole movement.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is not easy, unfortunately, for want of records of the facts, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assign with precision the circumstances under which and the moment when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s subconscious imagination received that effective impulsion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but an unequivocal trace is discovered, as I am about to show in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contemporaneous report of the proceedings of the first distinctly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian seance of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In March, 1894, Hélène made the acquaintance of M. Lemaître, who, being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exceedingly interested in the phenomena of abnormal psychology, was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present with others at some of her seances, and finally begged her to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hold some at his house. At the first of these (October 28, 1894),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène met a lady, a widow, who was greatly to be pitied. Besides
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suffering from a very serious affection of the eyes, Mme. Mirbel had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been terribly afflicted by the loss of her only son, Alexis, seventeen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years old, and a pupil of M. Lemaître. While not yet fully convinced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the truth of spiritism, it is easy to understand that Mme. Mirbel
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was very anxious to believe in that consolatory doctrine, and ready
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to accept it, if only some proofs could be furnished her; and what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more convincing testimony could she ask or receive than that of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,message from her beloved child? Moreover, it was probably not without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a secret hope of procuring a communication of this nature that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accepted the invitation which M. Lemaître had sent her with the idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of procuring some moments of distraction for the unhappy mother. As
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,happens frequently in Hélène’s case, this first seance fully satisfied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the desires of the sitters and surpassed their expectations. Speaking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only of that which concerns Mme. Mirbel, Hélène had the vision, first,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a young man, in the very detailed description of whom there was no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficulty in recognizing the deceased Alexis Mirbel; then of an old
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,man whom the table called Raspail, brought by the young man that he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,might treat his mother’s eyes, who thus had the double privilege of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,receiving through the table words of tenderness from her son, and from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Raspail directions for the treatment of the affliction of her eyes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nothing in that seance recalled in any way the planet Mars, and it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could not be foreseen from anything that occurred there that Alexis
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mirbel, disincarnated, would return later under the name of Esenale as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,official interpreter of the Martian language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It was altogether different a month later (November 25), at the second
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reunion at M. Lemaître’s, at which Mme. Mirbel was again present. On
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this occasion the astronomical dream appeared at once and dominated the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entire seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From the beginning, says the report of the seance, Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceived, in the distance and at a great height, a bright light. Then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she felt a tremor which almost caused her heart to cease beating, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which it seemed to her as though her head were empty and as if she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were no longer in the body. She found herself in a dense fog, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,changed successively from blue to a vivid rose color, to gray, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then to black: she is floating, she says; and the table, supporting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself on one leg, seemed to express a very curious floating movement.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Then she sees a star, growing larger, always larger, and becomes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finally, “as large as our house.” Hélène feels that she is ascending;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then the table gives, by raps: “Lemaître, that which you have so long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,desired!” Mlle. Smith, who had been ill at ease, finds herself feeling
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,better; she distinguishes three enormous globes, one of them very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beautiful. “On what am I walking?” she asks. And the table replies:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“On a world—Mars.” Hélène then began a description of all the strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,things which presented themselves to her view, and caused her as much
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprise as amusement. Carriages without horses or wheels, emitting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sparks as they glided by; houses with fountains on the roof; a cradle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having for curtains an angel made of iron with outstretched wings,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. What seemed less strange, were people exactly like the inhabitants
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of our earth, save that both sexes wore the same costume, formed of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trousers very ample, and a long blouse, drawn tight about the waist and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,decorated with various designs. The child in the cradle was exactly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like our children, according to the sketch which Hélène made from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory after the seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Finally, she saw upon Mars a sort of vast assembly hall, in which was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Professor Raspail, having in the first row of his hearers the young
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alexis Mirbel, who, by a typtological dictation, reproached his mother
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for not having followed the medical prescription which he gave her a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,month previously: “Dear mamma, have you, then, so little confidence in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us? You have no idea how much pain you have caused me!” Then followed a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversation of a private nature between Mme. Mirbel and her son, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latter replying by means of the table; then everything becomes quiet,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the vision of Mars effaces itself little by little; the table takes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same rotary movement on one foot which it had at the commencement
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the seance; Mlle. Smith finds herself again in the fogs and goes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through the same process as before in an inverse order. Then she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exclaims: “Ah! here I am back again!” and several loud raps on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table mark the end of the seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have related in its principal elements this first Martian seance, for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the sake of its importance in different respects.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The initial series of cœnæsthetic hallucinations, corresponding to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,voyage from the earth to Mars, reflects well the childish character of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an imagination which scientific problems or the exigencies of logic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trouble very little. Without doubt spiritism can explain how the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,material difficulties of an interplanetary journey may be avoided in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,purely mediumistic, fluid connection; but why, then, this persistence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of physical sensations, trouble with the heart, tremor, floating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensation, etc.? However it may be, this series of sensations is from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this time on the customary prelude, and, as it were, the premonitory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_aura_ of the Martian dream, with certain modifications, throughout all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances; sometimes it is complicated with auditive hallucinations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(rumbling, noise of rushing water, etc.), or sometimes olfactory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(disagreeable odors of burning, of sulphur, of a coming storm), oftener
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it tends to shorten and simplify itself, until it is either reduced to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a brief feeling of _malaise_, or to the initial visual hallucination
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the light, generally very brilliant and red, in which the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions usually appear.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But the point to which I wish to call special attention is that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,singular speech of the table, on the instant at which Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arrives on the distant star, and before it is known what star is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerned: “Lemaître, that which you have so much wished for!” This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,declaration, which may be considered as a dedication, so to speak,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inscribed on the frontispiece of the Martian romance, authorizes us,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in my opinion, in considering it and interpreting it in its origin,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as a direct answer to a wish of M. Lemaître, a desire which came at a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recent period to Hélène’s knowledge, and which has enacted with her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the initiatory rôle of her astronomical dream.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is true that M. Lemaître himself did not understand at the moment to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,what this preliminary warning referred, but the note which he inserted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the end of his report of that seance is instructive in this regard:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I do not know how to explain the first words dictated by the table:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,‘Lemaître, that which you have so much wished for!’ M. S. reminds me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that in a conversation which I had with him last summer I said to him:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,‘It would be very interesting to know what is happening upon other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,planets.’ If this is an answer to the wish of last year, very well.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It must be added that M. S., who had been sufficiently struck by this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wish of M. Lemaître to remember it for several months, was, during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all of the time referred to, one of the most regular attendants upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances of Mlle. Smith; and, to one who knows by experience all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that happens at the spiritistic reunions, before, after, and during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seance itself, there could hardly be any doubt but that it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through M. S., as intermediary, that Mlle. Smith had heard mentioned
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Lemaître’s regret at our relative ignorance of the inhabitants
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of other planets. This idea, probably caught on the wing during the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of suggestibility which accompanies the seances, returned with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,renewed force when Hélène was invited to hold a seance at the house of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Lemaître, and made more vivid also by the desire, which is always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latent in her, of making the visions as interesting as possible to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persons among whom she finds herself. Such is, in my opinion, the seed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which, falling into the ground and fertilized by former conversations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning the inhabitants of Mars and the possibility of spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relations with them, has served as the germ of the romance, the further
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,development of which it remains for me to trace.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One point which still remains to be cleared up in the seance, as I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,come to sum up, is the singularly artificial character and the slight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connection between the Martian vision, properly so called, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reappearance of Raspail and Alexis Mirbel. We do not altogether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understand what these personages have to do with it. What need is there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of their being to-day found on the planet Mars simply for the purpose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of continuing their interview with Mme. Mirbel, begun at a previous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance, without the intervention of any planet? The assembly-hall at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which they are found, while it is located on Mars, is a bond of union
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all the more artificial between them and that planet in that there is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing specifically Martian in its description and appears to have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been borrowed from our globe. This incident is at bottom a matter out
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the regular course, full of interest undoubtedly for Mme. Mirbel,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whom it directly concerns, but without intimate connection with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian world. It was evidently the astronomical revelation, intended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for M. Lemaître, and ripened by a period of incubation, which should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have furnished the material for this seance; but the presence of Mme.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mirbel awoke anew the memory of her son and of Raspail, which had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupied the preceding seance, and these memories, interfering with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian vision, become, for good or ill, incorporated as a strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,episode in it without having any direct connection with it. The work
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of unification, of dramatization, by which these two unequal chains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of ideas are harmonized and fused the one with the other through the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intermediation of an assembly-hall, is no more or no less extraordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than that which displays itself in all our nocturnal phantasmagoria,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,where certain absolutely heterogeneous memories often ally themselves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after an unexpected fashion, and afford opportunity for confusions of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the most bizarre character.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But mediumistic communications differ from ordinary dreams in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this—namely, the incoherence of the latter does not cause them to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have any consequences. We are astonished and diverted for a moment as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we reflect upon a dream. Sometimes a dream holds a little longer the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attention of the psychologist, who endeavors to unravel the intricate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plot of his dreams and to discover, amid the caprices of association
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or the events of the waking state, the origin of their tangled
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,threads. But, on the whole, this incoherence has no influence on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ultimate course of our thoughts, because we see in our dreams only the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,results of chance, without value in themselves and without objective
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is otherwise with spiritistic communications, by reason of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,importance and the credit accorded them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The medium who partially recollects her automatisms, or to whom the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters have detailed them after the close of the seance, adding also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their comments, becomes preoccupied with these mysterious revelations;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like the paranoiac, who perceives hidden meanings or a profound
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,significance in the most trifling coincidences, she seeks to fathom the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content of her strange visions, reflects on them, examines them in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,light of spiritistic notions; if she encounters difficulties in them,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or contradictions, her conscious or unconscious thought (the two are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not always in accord) will undertake the task of removing them, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,solving as well as possible the problems which these dream-creations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,considered as realities, impose upon her, and the later somnambulisms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will bear the imprint of this labor of interpretation or correction.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is to this point we have come at the commencement of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,astronomical romance of Mlle. Smith. The purely accidental and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fortuitous conjunction of the planet Mars and Alexis Mirbel in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance of the 25th of November determined their definitive welding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,together. Association by fortuitous contiguity is transformed into a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,logical connection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,II. LATER DEVELOPMENT OF THE MARTIAN CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This development was not effected in a regular manner; but for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,most part by leaps and bounds, separating stoppages more or less
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prolonged. After its inauguration in the seance of November 25, 1894,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it suffered a first eclipse of nearly fifteen months, attributable to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,new preoccupations which had installed themselves on the highest plane
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith’s subconsciousness and held that position throughout the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole of the year 1895.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Compared with the seance of November, 1894, that of February, 1896
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(of which a résumé follows), shows interesting innovations. Raspail
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not figure in it and henceforth does not appear again, which was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probably due to the fact that Mme. Mirbel had failed to make use of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,method of treatment which he had prescribed for her eyes. Young Mirbel,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the contrary, sole object of the desires and longings of his poor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mother, occupies the highest plane, and is the central figure of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision. He now speaks Martian and no longer understands French, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complicates the conversation somewhat. Further, not possessing the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,power of moving tables upon our globe, it is through the intervention
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the medium, by incarnating himself momentarily in Mlle. Smith, that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he henceforth communicates with his mother. These two latter points
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in their turn cause certain difficulties to arise, which, acting as a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ferment or a suggestion, will later usher in a new step in the progress
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the romance: Alexis Mirbel cannot return to incarnate himself in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a terrestrial medium if he is imprisoned in his Martian existence;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he must first terminate that and return to the condition in which he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again floats in interplanetary space; which “fluid” or wandering state
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,permits him at the same time to give us the French translation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian tongue; since, according to spiritism, a complete memory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of previous existences, and consequently of the various languages
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pertaining to them, is temporarily recovered during the phases of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These anticipatory hints will assist the reader in following more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,easily the thread of the somnambulistic romance in the résumé of its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,principal stages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,February 2, 1896.—I sum up, by enumerating them, the principal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulistic phases of this seance, which lasted more than two hours
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a half, and at which Mme. Mirbel assisted.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. Increasing hemisomnambulism, with gradual loss of consciousness of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the real environment—at the beginning the table bows several times to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mme. Mirbel, announcing that the coming scene is intended for her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After a series of elementary visual hallucinations (rainbow colors,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc.), meaning for Mme. Mirbel that she would finally become blind,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène arose, left the table, and held a long conversation with an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imaginary woman who wished her to enter a curious little car without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wheels or horses. She became impatient towards this woman, who, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having at first spoken to her in French, now persisted in speaking in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an unintelligible tongue, like Chinese. Leopold revealed to us by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little finger that it was the language of the planet Mars, that this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,woman is the mother of Alexis Mirbel, reincarnated on that planet,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and that Hélène herself will speak Martian. Presently Hélène begins
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to recite with increasing volubility an incomprehensible jargon, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning of which is as follows (according to notes taken by M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Lemaître at the time, as accurately as possible): “=Mitchma mitchmon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mimini tchouainem mimatchineg masichinof mézavi patelki abrésinad
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,navette naven navette mitchichénid naken chinoutoufiche=”.... From this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point the rapidity prevented the recognition of anything else, except
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,such scraps as “=téké ... katéchivist ... méguetch=,” ... or “=méketch
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,... kété ... chiméké=.” After a few minutes, Hélène interrupts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself, crying out, “Oh, I have had enough of it; you say such words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to me I will never be able to repeat them.” Then, with some reluctance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she consents to follow her interlocutrix into the car which was to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,carry her to Mars.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. The trance is now complete. Hélène thereupon mimics the voyage to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mars in three phases, the meaning of which is indicated by Leopold:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a regular rocking motion of the upper part of the body (passing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through the terrestrial atmosphere), absolute immobility and rigidity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(interplanetary space), again oscillations of the shoulders and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bust (atmosphere of Mars). Arrived upon Mars, she descends from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,car, and performs a complicated pantomime expressing the manners of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian politeness: uncouth gestures with the hands and fingers,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slapping of the hands, taps of the fingers upon the nose, the lips, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chin, etc., twisted courtesies, glidings, and rotation on the floor,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. It seems that is the way people approach and salute each other up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. This sort of dance having suggested to one of the sitters the idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of performing upon the piano, Hélène suddenly fell upon the floor in an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidently hypnotic state, which had no longer a Martian character. At
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the cessation of the music she entered into a mixed state, in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory of the Martian visions continually mingle themselves with some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea of her terrestrial existence. She talks to herself. “Those dreams
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are droll, all the same.... I must tell that to M. Lemaître. When he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[the Martian Alexis Mirbel] said ‘Good-day’ to me, he tapped himself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the nose.... He spoke to me in a queer language, but I understood
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it perfectly, all the same,” etc. Seated on the ground, leaning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against a piece of furniture, she continues, soliloquizing in French,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a low voice, to review the dream, mingling with it some wandering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reflections. She finds, for example, that the young Martian (Alexis)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was a remarkably big boy for one only five or six years old, as he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,claimed to be, and that the woman seemed very young to be his mother.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,4. After a transitory phase of sighs and hiccoughs, followed by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,profound sleep with muscular relaxation, she enters into Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism and murmurs some confused words: “=Késin ouitidjé=” ...
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. I command her to speak French to me; she seems to understand, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,replies in Martian, with an irritated and imperious tone, I ask her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to tell me her name; she replies, “=Vasimini Météche=.” With the idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that, perhaps, she “is incarnating” the young Alexis, of whom she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoken so much in the preceding phase, I urge Mme. Mirbel to approach
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her, and thereupon begins a scene of incarnation really very affecting;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mme. Mirbel is on her knees, sobbing bitterly, in the presence of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovered son, who shows her marks of the most profound affection and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caresses her hands “exactly as he was accustomed to do during his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last illness,” all the time carrying on a discourse in Martian (=tin
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is toutch=), which the poor mother cannot understand, but to which an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accent of extreme sweetness and a tender intonation impart an evident
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of words of consolation and filial tenderness. This pathetic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,duet lasted about ten minutes, and was brought to an end by a return
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to lethargic sleep, from which Hélène awakened at the end of a quarter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of an hour, pronouncing a short Martian word, after which she instantly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovered the use of her French and her normal waking state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,5. Questioned as to what had passed, Hélène, while drinking tea,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,narrates the dream which she has had. She has a sufficiently clear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory of her journey and of what she has seen on Mars, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the exception of the young man, of whom she has retained only a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollection of the scene of incarnation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But suddenly, in the midst of the conversation, she begins to speak in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian, without appearing to be aware of it, and while continuing to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chat with us in the most natural manner; she appeared to understand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all our words, and answered in her strange idiom, in the most normal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tone, and seemed very much astonished when we told her that we did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not understand her language; she evidently believes she is speaking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French.[14] By questioning her concerning a visit which she had made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a few days before to M. C., and asking her the number and the names
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the persons whom she met there, we succeed in identifying the four
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following Martian words: =Métiche S.=, _Monsieur S._; =Médache C.=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_Madame C._; =Métaganiche Smith=, _Mademoiselle Smith_; =kin’t’che=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_four_. After which she resumes definitively her French. Interrogated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to the incident which has transpired, she is astounded, has only a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hesitating and confused memory of her having spoken at all this evening
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her visit to M. C., and does not recognize nor understand the four
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian words given above when they are repeated to her. On several
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasions during this seance I had made the suggestion to Hélène that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at a given signal, after her awaking, she would recover the memory of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian words pronounced by her and of their meaning. But Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who was present, declared that this command would not be obeyed, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that a translation could not be obtained this evening. The signal,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,though often repeated, was, in fact, without result.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It has seemed to me necessary to describe with some detail this seance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at which the Martian language made its first appearance, in order to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,place before the reader all the fragments which we have been able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gather, without, of course, any guarantee of absolute accuracy, since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,every one knows how difficult it is to note the sounds of unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words. A curious difference is to be noticed between the words picked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up in the course of the seance and the four words several times
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeated by Hélène, the meaning and pronunciation of which have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,determined with complete accuracy in the post-hypnotic return of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulistic dream. Judged by these latter, the Martian language
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is only a puerile counterfeit of French, of which she preserves in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,each word a number of syllables and certain conspicuous letters. In
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other phrases, on the contrary, also making use of later texts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which have been translated, as we shall see hereafter, it cannot be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discovered what it is. We are constrained to believe that these first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,outbreaks of Martian, characterized by a volubility which we have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rarely met with since then, was only a pseudo-Martian, a continuation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of sounds uttered at random and without any real meaning, analogous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the gibberish which children use sometimes in their games of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“pretending” to speak Chinese or Indian, and that the real Martian was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only created by an unskilful distortion of French, in a post-hypnotic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,access of hemisomnambulism, in order to respond to the manifest desire
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the sitters to obtain the precise significance of some isolated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian words.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The impossibility, announced by Leopold, of procuring a translation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that same evening of the pretended Martian spoken for the first time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during that seance, and the fact that it could not again be obtained,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,give some support to the preceding theory.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The circumstance that Hélène, in remembering her dream in phase No.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3, had the sentiment of having _well understood_ this unknown jargon,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is not an objection, since the children who amuse themselves by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simulating an uncouth idiom—to recur to that example—do not retain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the least consciousness of the ideas which their gibberish is assumed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to express. It seems, in short, that if this new language was already
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,really established at that time in Hélène’s subliminal consciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the point of sustaining fluently discourses of several minutes’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,duration, some phrases at least would not have failed to gush forth,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spontaneously sometimes, in the course of ordinary life, and in order
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to throw light upon visions of Martian people or landscapes. More
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than seven months had to elapse before that phenomenon, which was so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frequent afterwards, began to appear.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,May we not see in this half-year a period of incubation, employed in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the subliminal fabrication of a language, properly so called—that is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to say, formed of precise words and with a definite signification, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imitation of the four terms just referred to—to replace the disordered
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nonsense of the beginning?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,However it may be, and to return to our story, one can imagine the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interest which that sudden and unexpected apparition of mysterious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speech aroused, and which the authority of Leopold would not allow to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be taken for anything other than the language of Mars. The natural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curiosity of Hélène herself, as well as that of her friends, to know
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more about our neighbors of other worlds and their way of expressing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves should naturally have contributed to the development of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal dream. The following seance, unhappily, did not justify the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,promise with which it began.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,February 16, 1896.—“At the beginning of this seance, Hélène has a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision of Alexis Mirbel, who announces, by means of the table, that he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has not forgotten his French, and that he will give a translation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian words another day. But this prediction is not fulfilled.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Whether Hélène, for the reason that she is not feeling well to-day,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or that the presence of some one antipathetic to her has hindered the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,production of the phenomena, the Martian somnambulism, which seemed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the point of breaking forth, did not make its appearance. Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remains in a crepuscular state, in which the feeling of present reality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the Martian ideas on the level of consciousness interfere with and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mutually obscure each other. She speaks in French with the sitters,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but mingling with it here and there a strange word (such as =méche=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=chinit=, =chéque=, which, according to the context, seem to signify
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_pencil_, _ring_, _paper_), and appears far away from her actual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surroundings. She is astonished, in particular, at the sight of M. R.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupied in taking notes by the _procès verbal_, and seems to find
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that manner of writing with a pen or pencil strange and absurd, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without explaining clearly how it was to be otherwise accomplished.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The importance of this seance is in the fact that the idea stands out
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clearly (which was not to be realized until a year and a half later) of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a mode of handwriting peculiar to the planet Mars.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This seance, which was almost a failure, was the last of that period.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s health, which became more and more impaired by standing too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long on her feet and overwork at her desk, necessitated her taking a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complete rest. I have mentioned the fact that during these six months,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without any regular seances, she was subject to a superabundance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of spontaneous visions and somnambulisms; but these automatisms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,belonged to the Hindoo or other cycles, and I do not believe that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she experienced during that time any phenomena which were clearly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,related to the Martian romance. On the other hand, as soon as she was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,re-established in and had returned to her normal mode of life, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latter appeared again with all the more intensity, dating from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following nocturnal vision. (See Fig. 9.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 5, 1896.—Hélène narrates that having arisen at a quarter-past
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three in the morning to take in some flowers that stood upon the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,window-sill and were threatened by the wind, instead of going back
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to bed immediately she sat down upon her bed and saw before her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a landscape and some peculiar people. She was on the border of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beautiful blue-pink lake, with a bridge the sides of which were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,transparent and formed of yellow tubes like the pipes of an organ,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of which one end seemed to be plunged into the water. The earth was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peach-colored; some of the trees had trunks widening as they ascended,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while those of others were twisted. Later a crowd approached the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bridge, in which one woman was especially prominent. The women wore
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hats which were flat, like plates. Hélène does not know who these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,people are, but has the feeling of having conversed with them. On
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the bridge there was a man of dark complexion (Astané), carrying in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his hands an instrument somewhat resembling a carriage-lantern in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance, which, being pressed, emitted flames, and which seemed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be a flying-machine. By means of this instrument the man left the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bridge, touched the surface of the water, and returned again to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bridge. This tableau lasted twenty-five minutes, since Hélène, upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,returning to consciousness, observed that her candle was still burning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and ascertained that it was then 3.40 o’clock. She is convinced that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she did not fall asleep, but was wide awake during all of this vision.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(See Figs. 10 and 11.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From that time the spontaneous Martian visions are repeated and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,multiplied. Mlle. Smith experiences them usually in the morning, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,awaking and before rising from her bed; sometimes in the evening, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasionally at other times during the day. It is in the course of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these visual hallucinations that the Martian language appears again
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under an auditive form.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 22, 1896.—During these last days Hélène has seen again
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on different occasions the Martian man, with or without his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flying-machine; for example, he appeared to her while she was taking a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bath, at the edge of the bath-tub. She has had several times visions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a strange house the picture of which followed her with so much
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persistency that she finally painted it (see Fig. 12). At the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time she heard on three different occasions a sentence the meaning of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she does not know, but which she was able to take down with her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pencil as follows: “=Dodé né ci haudan té méche métiche Astané ké dé mé
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,véche.=” (As was ascertained six weeks after, by the translation given
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the seance of the 2d of November, this phrase indicates that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange house is that of the Martian man, who is called Astané.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This phrase was undoubtedly Martian, but what was the meaning of it?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After having hoped in vain for nearly a month that the meaning would be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revealed in some way or other, I decided to try a disguised suggestion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I wrote to Leopold himself a letter, in which I appealed to his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,omniscience as well as to his kindness to give me some enlightenment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in regard to the strange language which piqued our curiosity, and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in particular, as to the meaning of the phrase Hélène had heard. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asked him to answer me in writing, by means of Hélène’s hand. We did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not have to wait long for a reply. Hélène received my letter the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,20th of October, and on the evening of the 22d, seized with a vague
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,desire to write, she took a pencil, which placed itself in the regular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,position, between the thumb and the index-finger (whereas she always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,held her pen between the middle and index-finger), and traced rapidly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the characteristic handwriting of Leopold and with his signature,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a beautiful epistle of eighteen Alexandrine lines addressed to me, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the ten last are as follows, being an answer to my request that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the secrets of Martian be revealed to me:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Ne crois pas qu’en t’aimant comme un bien tendre frère
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Je te diroi des cieux tout le profond mystère;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Je t’aideroi beaucoup, je t’ouvriroi la voie,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Mais à toi de saisir et chercher avec joie;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Et quand tu la verras d’ici-bas détachée,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Quand son âme mobile aura pris la volée
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Et planera sur Mars aux superbes couleurs;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Si tu veux obtenir d’elle quelques lueurs,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Pose bien doucement, ta main sur son front pâle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Et prononce bien bas le doux nom d’Esenale!”[15]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have been very sensible to the pledges of fraternal affection that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold has accorded me, but this time I was especially moved, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,although the very uncommon name of Esenale meant absolutely nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to me, I took care not to forget the singular rule which had been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnished me. At the following seance an opportunity for using it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presented itself, and Leopold went so far as to direct himself the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,application of his method by giving us his instructions, sometimes with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one finger, sometimes with another, during Hélène’s Martian trance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Monday, November 2, 1896.—After various characteristic symptoms of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,departure for Mars (vertigo, affection of the heart, etc.), Hélène went
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a deep sleep. I had recourse to the prescribed method, but Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the fingers of the right hand, indicated that the proper moment had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not yet arrived, and said: “When the soul shall again have regained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possession of itself thou shalt execute my order; she will then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,describe to you, while still asleep, that which she shall have seen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on Mars.” Shortly after he adds, “Make her sit down in an easy-chair”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(instead of the uncomfortable one which she had taken, as was her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wont); then, as her peaceful sleep still continued, he informs us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again that she is _en route_ towards Mars; that once arrived up there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she understands the Martian spoken around her, although she has never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,learned it; that it is not he, Leopold, who will translate the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for us—not because he does not wish to do so, but because he cannot;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that this translation is the performance of Esenale, who is actually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnate in space, but who has recently lived upon Mars, and also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the earth, which permits him to act as interpreter, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After half an hour of waiting, Hélène’s calm sleep gave way to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agitation, and she passed into another form of somnambulism, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sighs, rhythmic movements of the head and hands, then grotesque Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gestures and French words murmured softly to the hearing of Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who seems to accompany her on Mars, and to whom she confides some of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her impressions in regard to that which she perceives. In the midst of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this soliloquy a vertical movement of the arm, peculiar to Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicates that the moment has arrived for carrying out his directions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I place my hand on Hélène’s forehead, and utter the name of Esenale,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to which Hélène replies in a soft, feeble, somewhat melancholy, voice:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Esenale has gone away ... he has left me alone ... but he will return,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,... he will soon return.... He has taken me by the hand and made me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enter the house [that which she saw in her vision, and of which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made the drawing a month ago—see Fig. 12].... I do not know where
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Esenale is leading me, but he has said to me, ‘=Dodé né ci haudan té
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,méche métiche Astané ké dé mé véche=,’ but I did not understand; ...
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=dodé=, _this_; =né=, _is_; =ci=, _the_; =haudan=, _house_; =te=, _of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the_; =méche=, _great_; =métiche=, _man_; =Astané=, _Astané_; =ké=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_whom_; =dé=, _thou_; =mé=, _hast_; =véche=, _seen_.... This is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,house of the great man Astané, whom thou hast seen.... Esenale has told
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me that.... Esenale has gone away.... He will return ... he will soon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,return ... he will teach me to speak ... and Astané will teach me to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,write.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have abridged this long monologue, constantly interrupted by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,silences, and the continuation of which I only obtained by having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constant recourse to the name of Esenale as the magic word, alone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,capable of extracting each time a few words from Hélène’s confused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brain. After the last sentence or phrase, in which one can see a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,categorical prediction of the Martian writing, her weak, slow voice
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was finally hushed, and Leopold directs by means of his left middle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finger the removal of the hand from the forehead. Then follow the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,customary alternations of lethargic sleep, sighs, catalepsy, momentary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relapses into somnambulism, etc. Then she opens her eyes permanently,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very much surprised to find herself in the easy-chair. Her brain is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,greatly confused. “It seems to me as though I had a great many things
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on my mind, but I cannot fix upon anything.” By degrees she regains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a clear consciousness, but of the entire seance, which has lasted an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hour and a half, there only remain some fragments of Martian visions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and no recollection whatever of the scene with Esenale and that of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This process of translation, the first application of which is here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presented, becomes from this time the standard method.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For more than two years and a half, the imposition of the hand upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s forehead and the uttering of the name of Esenale at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proper moment during the trance constitute the “open sesame” of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian-French dictionary buried in the subliminal strata of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness. The idea of this ceremonial is evidently to awaken by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestion—in a certain favorable somnambulistic phase, which Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recognizes and himself announces by a gesture of the arm—the secondary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality which has amused itself by composing the phrases of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extra-terrestrial language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In spiritistic terms, it amounts to invoking the disincarnate Esenale,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,otherwise called Alexis Mirbel, who, having lived on both planets, can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,easily devote himself to the functions of an interpreter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The only difference between this scene of translation and other seances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is in the ease and rapidity with which it is performed. Esenale seems
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes to be thoroughly asleep and difficult to awaken; Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persists in replying by the stereotyped refrain, and incessantly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeats, in her soft and melancholy voice, “Esenale has gone away—he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will soon return—he has gone away—he will soon return.” Then some more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,energetic passes or friction on the forehead are necessary, instead of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the simple pressure of the hand, in order to break up this mechanical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repetition, which threatens to go on forever, and in order to obtain,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finally, the repetition and translation, word by word, of the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,texts. Otherwise the voice continues identical with that of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refrain, soft and feeble, and one can never know whether it is Esenale
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself who is making use of Hélène’s phonetic apparatus without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,modifying it, or whether it is she herself, repeating in her sleep what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Esenale has told her; the categorical distinctness and absence of all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hesitation in pronunciation of the Martian are in favor of the former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposition, which is also corroborated by the fact that it was also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in this same voice that Alexis Mirbel (Esenale) spoke to his mother in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the scenes of incarnation. (See Fig. 13.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 13. Martian landscape. Greenish-yellow sky. A
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, man with a yellow complexion, dressed in white, in a boat of brown,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, yellow, black, and red colors on a blue-green lake; rose-tinted rock,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, with white and yellow spots; dark green vegetation; buildings of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, brown, red, and rose-lilac tints, with white window-panes and curtains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of bright blue.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It would be wearisome to recount in detail all the further
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manifestations of the Martian cycle, which occur frequently in numerous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances and also under the form of spontaneous visions in the daily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life of Mlle. Smith. The reader can gain an idea of them both from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarks of the following paragraph, as well as from the explanatory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,résumés added to the Martian texts, which will be collected in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following chapter. It merely remains for me to say a word here as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the manner in which the pictures of Hélène relative to Mars, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reproduced in autotype in the Figs. 9 to 20, have been made.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,None of these pictures has been executed in complete somnambulism, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they have not, consequently, like the drawings of certain mediums, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interest of a graphic product, absolutely automatic, engendered outside
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of and unknown to the ordinary consciousness. They are nothing more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than simple compositions of the normal consciousness of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They represent a type of intermediary activity, and correspond to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of hemisomnambulism. We have seen above (p. 20) that already in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her childhood Hélène seems to have executed various pieces of work in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a semi-automatic manner. The same performance is often reproduced on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the occasion of the Martian visions, which sometimes pursue her so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persistently that she decides to execute them with pencil and brush;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,work which, in anticipation, often frightens her by its difficulty,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but which, when the time comes, accomplishes itself, to her great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,astonishment, with an ease and perfection almost mechanical. Here is an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,example:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One Tuesday evening, having already retired, Hélène saw on her bed some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,magnificent flowers, very different from ours, but without perfume,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and which she did not touch, for during her visions she has no idea of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moving, and remains inert and passive. The afternoon of the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,day, at her desk, she found herself enveloped in a red light, and at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same time felt an indefinable but violent affection of the heart
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(_aura_ of the voyage to Mars). “The red light continues about me, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I find myself surrounded by extraordinary flowers of the kind which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saw on my bed, but they had no perfume. I will bring you some sketches
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of them on Sunday.” She sent them to me, in fact, on Monday, with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following note: “I am very well satisfied with my plants. They are the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exact reproduction of those which it afforded me so much pleasure to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,behold [No. 3, in Fig. 16, which, beforehand, Hélène despaired of being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to render well], which appeared to me on the latter occasion, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I greatly regret that you were not here to see me execute the drawing:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the pencil glided so quickly that I did not have time to notice what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contours it was making. I can assert without any exaggeration that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it was not my hand alone that made the drawing, but that truly an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,invisible force guided the pencil in spite of me. The various tints
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appeared to me upon the paper, and my brush was directed in spite of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me towards the color which I ought to use. This seems incredible, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is, notwithstanding, the exact truth, The whole was done so quickly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that I marvelled at it.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 9. Martian landscape. Pink bridge, with yellow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, railings plunging down into a pale-blue and purple-tinted lake. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, shores and hills of a red color, no green being visible. All the trees
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, are of a brick-red, purple, or violet tint. [From the collection of M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Lemaître]]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[Illustration: Fig. 15, Fig. 16, Fig. 17
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Fig. 15. Light-brown and yellow trunk and leaves; double-lobed flowers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of a vivid red, out of which proceed yellow stamens like black
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, threads. Fig. 16. Large leaves, light yellowish brown; flowers with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, purple petals with black stamens and black stems covered with little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, purple leaves like petals. Fig. 17. Large violet fruit with black
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, spots, surmounted by a yellow and violet plume. The trunk of brown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, color with black veins, with six branches of the same character ending
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in a yellow hook. Red-brick soil.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The house of Astané (Fig. 12), and the extensive landscapes of Figs.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,13 and 14, are also the products of a quasi-automatic activity, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always gives great satisfaction to Mlle. Smith. It is, in a way, her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal self which holds the brush and executes, at its pleasure,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its own tableaux, which also have the value of veritable originals.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Other drawings, on the contrary (for example, the portrait of Astané,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 11), which have given Hélène much trouble without having satisfied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her very well, should be regarded as simple copies from memory, by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary personality, of past visions, the memory of which is graven
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon her mind in a manner sufficiently persistent to serve as a model
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several days afterwards. In both cases, but especially in the first,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s paintings may be considered as faithful reproductions of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tableaux which unfold themselves before her, and consequently give us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,better than most verbal descriptions an idea of the general character
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her Martian visions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Let us see now what kind of information the messages and somnambulisms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène furnish us in regard to the brilliant planet whose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complicated revolutions formerly revealed to a Kepler the fundamental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secrets of modern astronomy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,III. THE PERSONAGES OF THE MARTIAN ROMANCE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In using the word “romance” to designate the Martian communications,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taken as a whole, I wish to state that they are, to my mind, a work
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of pure imagination, but not that there are to be found in them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characteristics of unity and of internal co-ordination, of sustained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,action, of increasing interest to the final dénouement. The Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,romance is only a succession of detached scenes and tableaux, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,order or intimate connection, and showing no other common traits beyond
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the unknown language spoken in it, the quite frequent presence of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same personages, and a certain fashion of originality, a color or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quality badly defined as “exotic” or “bizarre” in the landscapes, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,edifices, the costumes, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of a consecutive plot or intrigue, properly so called, there is no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trace. I naturally speak only of that which we have learned from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances of Mlle. Smith, or from the spontaneous visions which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollects sufficiently to narrate afterwards. But this fails to shadow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forth the hidden source whence they all spring.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Without determining the question, I am inclined, nevertheless, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accord to the Martian romance, in some profound stratum of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being, a much greater continuity and extent than would appear from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,judging it solely by the fragments known to us. We have only, in my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opinion, a few pages, taken at hazard from different chapters; the bulk
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the volume is wanting, and the little we possess does not enable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us to reconstruct it in a satisfactory manner. We must, therefore, be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content with sorting this _débris_ of unequal importance, according to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their content, independently of their chronological order, and grouping
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them around the principal personages which figure in them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The anonymous and mixed crowd which forms the base of some of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian visions only differs from that of our own country by the large
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,robe common to both sexes, the flat hats, and the sandals bound to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feet by straps. The interest is confined to a small number of more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinct personages having each his own name, always terminating in an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_e_ with the men and in an _i_ with the women, except only in the case
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Esenale, who occupies, however, a place by himself in his quality of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnated Martian, fulfilling the function of interpreter. Let us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,begin by saying a few words about him.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ESENALE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We have seen (p. 164) that this name was hinted at by Leopold on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,22d of October, 1896, without any other explanation as a means of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtaining the signification of the Martian words. Then at the first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recurrence to this talisman (November 2d, see p. 166) we learn only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that he was a deceased inhabitant of Mars, whose acquaintance Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had recently made in interplanetary space. It was only at the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance (November 8th), where we find Mme. Mirbel, that, after an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnation of her son Alexis, followed by the scene of translation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(see text 3) and in response to questions of the sitters—which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,answered very well the purpose of suggestion—Leopold affirmed by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the left index-finger that Esenale was Alexis Mirbel. It cannot be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,determined whether that identification constituted a primitive fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which it pleased Leopold to keep secret, only revealing it at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,end of a seance at which Mme. Mirbel was present, or whether, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I am inclined to regard it, it was only established at that same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance, under the domination of the circumstances of the moment. As a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translator of Martian, Esenale did not show great talent. He had to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entreated, and it was necessary often to repeat his name while pressing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or rubbing Hélène’s forehead, in order to obtain the exact meaning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the last texts which had been given. He possessed, it is true, an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,excellent memory, and faithfully reproduced, before giving it word by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,word, the French for the Martian phrases which Hélène had heard several
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weeks before and only seen again five or six months afterwards (text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,24), and of which there had been no previous opportunity to obtain a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation. But it was to these latter texts, not yet interpreted,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that he confined his willingness; on two occasions only did he add, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his own accord, some words of no importance (texts 15 and 36.) Text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,No. 19, for instance, has always remained untranslated, and my later
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,efforts (June 4, 1899) to obtain the meaning of the unknown words =milé
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,piri= have been in vain; moreover, Esenale has not been able to fill up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the gaps in text No. 24.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alexis Mirbel, after the two first Martian seances, reported on pp.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,146 and 154, called Esenale, often accorded his mother, in scenes of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnation, somewhat pathetic, touching messages of filial tenderness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and consolation (texts 3, 4, 11, 15, and 18). It is to be noted that,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,although opportunities for continuing this rôle were not wanting,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he appears to have completely abandoned it for the last two years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,His last message of this kind (October 10, 1897, text 18) followed a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,month after a curious seance in which Leopold sought to explain to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us spontaneously—no one had mentioned the subject—certain flagrant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contradictions in the first manifestations of Alexis-Esenale. Here is a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,résumé of that scene, with the text of Leopold’s communication:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 12, 1897.—After sundry waking visions, Mlle. Smith hears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold speaking; her eyes are closed, and, appearing to be asleep, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeats, mechanically and in a slow and feeble voice, the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words, which her guide addresses to her: “Thou art going to pay close
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attention. Tell them now [the sitters] to keep as quiet as possible,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that is what often mars the phenomena, the comings and goings, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idle chatter of which you are never weary. You recollect there was,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several months ago, a young man, that young man Alexis Mirbel, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,came to give counsel to his mother at a reunion you held with M. (I do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not understand the name he gave) ... at Carouge[16].... Well, at that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moment he happened—that is to say, two days before—to die on ... (I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could not understand the name) ... where he had been ... or he had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regained life.[17] This is why I have come to tell you to-day he was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in that phase of separation of the material part from the soul which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,permitted him to recollect his previous existence—that is to say, his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life here below in this state; he not only recollects his first mother,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but can speak once more the language he used to speak with her. Some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time after, when the soul was finally at rest, he no longer recollected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that first language; he returns, he hovers about (his mother), sees her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with joy, but is incapable of speaking to her in your language.[18]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Whether it will return to him I do not know and cannot say, but I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe that it will. And now listen.” Here Mlle. Smith seems to awake,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opens her eyes, and has a long Martian vision, which she describes in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,detail. She now sees a little girl in a yellow robe, whose name she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hears as =Anini Nikaïné=, occupied with various childish games—_e. g._,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with a small wand she makes a number of grotesque little figures dance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a white tub, large and shallow, full of sky-blue water. Then come
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other persons, and, finally, Astané, who has a pen in his fingers, and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little by little, takes hold of Hélène’s arm and throws her into a deep
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trance for the purpose of causing her to write text No. 17.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These spontaneous explanations of Leopold are interesting in that they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,betray clearly the subliminal desire to introduce some order and logic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into the incoherences of the mediumistic reveries. It is a form of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the process of justification and retrospective interpretation intended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to make the incidents of the past accord with the dominant ideas of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the present (see p. 95). In appearance, the theory upon which Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rested, after having doubtless meditated long, is quite awkward;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but perhaps it was difficult for him to do better, since no one can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accomplish the impossible.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ASTANÉ
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“The great man Astané” is the reincarnation on Mars of the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fakir Kanga, who was a devoted companion and friend of Simandini. He
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has preserved in his new existence the special character of savant or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of sorcerer, which he formerly possessed in India, and he has equally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,retained all his affection for his princess of old, who has been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,restored to him in Mlle. Smith; he frequently utilizes his magic powers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to _evoke_ her—that is to say, to re-enter into spiritual communication
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with her, notwithstanding the distances between their actual places
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of habitation. The ways and means of that evocation remain, however,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enveloped in mystery. We cannot say whether it was Hélène that rejoined
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané on Mars during her somnambulism, or whether it was he who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,descended “fluidly” towards her and brought to her the odors of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,far-distant planet.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When Astané says to Hélène, during a seance: “Come to me an instant.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Come and admire these flowers,” etc. (text 8), or shows her the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curiosities of his Martian abode, it seems as though he had really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,called her to him through space; but when he appears to her, while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,awake, at the edge of her bath-tub, and expresses his chagrin at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finding her still on this miserable earth (text 7), it must be admitted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it is he who has descended to her and inspires her with these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions of an upper world. It is of no importance, on the whole. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is here to be noted that, in these evocations, Astané only manifests
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself in visual and auditive hallucinations, never in tactile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impressions or those of general sensibility; in the sphere of emotion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his presence is accompanied by a great calm on the part of Hélène, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,profound bliss, and an ecstatic disposition, which is the correlative
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and pendant of the happiness experienced by Astané himself (texts 10,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,17, etc.) at finding himself in the presence of his idol of the past.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The social state of Astané—I should rather say his name, his quality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of sorcerer, and his previous terrestrial existence in the body of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Kanga—was not immediately revealed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nevertheless, at his first apparition (September 5, 1896, see p.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,162), he rises superior to the crowd, inasmuch as he alone possesses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a flying-machine incomprehensible to us. In the following weeks Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith hears his name, and sees him again on many occasions, as well as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his house (Fig. 12), but it is only at the end of two months and a half
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that his identity and his “evocative” powers become known, at a seance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at which I was not present, and during which Hélène did not, contrary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her usual custom, fall completely asleep. The following is a résumé
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the notes, which I owe to the kindness of M. Cuendet:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,November 19, 1896.—Contrary to the experience of the preceding seances,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith remained constantly awake, her arms free on the table,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversing and even laughing all the while with the sitters. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,messages were obtained by means of visions and typtological dictations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène having asked Leopold how it happens that she had been able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communicate with a being living on Mars, she has a vision in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané appears to her in a costume more Oriental than Martian. “Where
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have I seen that costume?” asks she; and the table replies “_In
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,India_,” which indicates that Astané is an ex-Hindoo reincarnated on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mars. At the same time Hélène has a vision of an Oriental landscape
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she believes she has already seen before, but without knowing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,where. She sees Astané there, carrying under his arm rolls of paper of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a dirty white color, and bowing in Oriental fashion before a woman,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also clothed in Oriental garments, whom she also believes she has seen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before. These personages appear to her to be “inanimate, like statues.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The sitters ask whether the vision was not a simple tableau (of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,past) presented by Leopold; the table replies in the affirmative,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then inclines itself significantly towards Mlle. Smith, when some one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asked who that Oriental woman might be, and the idea is put forth that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possibly she represents Simandini. Finally, to further questions of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters, the table (Leopold) dictates again that Astané in his Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existence was called _Kanga_, who was a “_sorcerer of the period_”;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then that “_Astané on the planet Mars possesses the same faculty of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evocation which he had possessed in India_.” Leopold is then asked if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the power of Astané is greater than his. “_A different power, of equal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strength_,” replies the table. Finally, Hélène desiring to know whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané when he evokes her sees her in her real character or that of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo incarnation, the table affirms that he sees her in her Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character, and adds: “_and, in consequence, under those characteristics
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she [Hélène] possesses to-day and which are in such striking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,harmony with those of _Sima_N_dini_,” insisting on the _N_ in the middle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the name.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is to be remarked that at this sitting it was Leopold who gave all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the information in regard to the past of Astané, and that he recognizes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in him a power over Hélène almost equal to his own. It is strange that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the accredited guide of Mlle. Smith, ordinarily so jealous of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rights over her and ready to take offence at all rival pretensions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so freely accords such prerogatives to Astané. This unexpected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mildness is still more surprising when the singular similarity of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,position of these two personages in regard to Hélène is considered.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Kanga, the Hindoo fakir, holds in the life of Simandini exactly the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same place as Cagliostro in the life of Marie Antoinette, the place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a sorcerer giving beneficial counsel, and at the same time of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,platonic adorer, and both of them in their actual rôles of Astané and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold preserve for Mlle. Smith the respectful attachment which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they had for her illustrious former existences. How is it these two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extra-terrestrial pretenders do not hate each other the more cordially
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,since their rival claims upon Hélène have identical foundations? But,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,far from in the least disputing her possession, they assist each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other in the most touching fashion. When Astané writes in Martian by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith’s right hand that the noise of the sitters threatens to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make him insane (see text 20) it is Leopold who comes to his rescue
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in making them keep silent by his gestures with the left arm. When
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold indicates to me that the moment for pressing Hélène’s forehead
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has arrived, it is Astané who lends him his pencil in order that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,message may be written (see below, seance of September 12, 1897, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 23), and the exchange of powers takes place between them without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the medium experiencing the least shock, and without its betraying
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself outwardly otherwise than by the difference of their handwriting.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is true that Leopold’s apparitions to Hélène are infinitely more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frequent and his incarnations much more complete than those of Astané,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who shows himself to her at increasing intervals, and has never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attained to speaking by her mouth. It makes no difference: these two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages resemble each other too much for mutual toleration—if they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are really two.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,My conclusion presses. Astané is, at bottom, only a copy, a double, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,transposition in the Hindoo-Martian manner of Leopold. They are two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,variations of one primitive theme. In regarding these two beings, as I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do, in the absence of proof to the contrary, not as real and objective
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individualities, but as pseudo-personalities, dream fictions, fantastic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subdivisions of the hypnoid consciousness of Mlle. Smith, it may be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,said that it is the same fundamental emotion which has inspired these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,twin rôles, the details of which have been adapted by the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagination to correspond to the diversity of the circumstances. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contradiction painfully felt between the proud aspirations of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_grande dame_ and the vexing ironies of reality has caused the two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tragic previous existences to gush forth—intrinsically identical,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in spite of the differences of place and epoch—of the noble girl of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Arabia, having become Hindoo princess, burned alive on the tomb of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,despot of a husband, and of her Austrian highness, having become Queen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of France and sharing the martyrdom of her spouse.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On parallel lines, in these two dreams issuing from the same emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,source, it is the universal and constant taste of the human imagination
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for the marvellous, allied to the very feminine need of a respectful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and slightly idolatrous protector, which on the one side has created
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,out of whole cloth the personage of Kanga-Astané, and on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand has absorbed, without being careful in modifying authentic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,history, that of Cagliostro-Leopold. Both are idealistic sorcerers, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,profound sagacity, tender-hearted, who have placed their great wisdom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the service of the unfortunate sovereign and made for her, of their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,devotion, amounting almost to adoration, a tower of strength, a supreme
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consolation in the midst of all the bitternesses of real life. And as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold acts as guide for Hélène Smith in the general course of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,actual earthly existence, so Astané seemingly plays the same rôle in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the moments of that life in which Hélène leaves our sublunar world to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fly away to the orb of Mars.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 12. House of Astané. Blue sky; soil, mountains,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and walls of a red color. The two plants, with twisted trunks, have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, purple leaves; the others have long green lower leaves and small
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, purple higher leaves. The framework of the doors, windows, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, decorations are in the shape of trumpets, and are of a brownish-red
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, color. White glass (?) and curtains or shades of a turquoise-blue. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, railings of the roof are yellow, with blue tips.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 14. Martian landscape. Sky of yellow; green lake;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, gray shores bordered by a brown fence; bell-towers on the shore, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, yellow-brown tones, with corners and pinnacles ornamented with pink
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and blue balls; hill of red rocks, with vegetation of a rather dark
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, green interspersed with rose, purple, and white spots (flowers);
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, buildings at the base constructed of brick-red lattice-work; edges and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, corners terminating in brown-red trumpets; immense white window-panes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, with turquoise-blue curtains; roofs furnished with yellow-brown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, bell-turrets, brick-red battlements, or with green and red plants
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, (like those of Astané’s house, Fig. 12). Persons with large white
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, head-dresses and red or brown robes.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If, then, Astané is only a reflection, a projection of Leopoldd in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian sphere, he has there assumed a special coloring, and has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,outwardly harmonized himself with this new situation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He is clothed in a voluminous, embroidered robe; he has long hair, no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beard, a yellow complexion, and carries in his hand a white roll, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which he writes with a point fastened to the end of the index-finger.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,His house (Fig. 12) is quadrangular, with gates and windows, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reminds one by its exterior aspect of some Oriental structure, with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flat roof embellished with plants.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The inside is also appropriate. The furniture recalls ours by force
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of contrast. We have few details; with the exception of a musical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,instrument with vertical cylinders, closely related to our organs, upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Hélène sometimes sees and hears Astané playing, seated on a stool
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with one foot, resembling a milking-stool.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When we pass to the garden the same amalgam of analogies and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unlikenesses to our flora are discovered. We have seen that Hélène has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been often haunted in the waking state by visions of Martian plants and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flowers, which she finally draws or paints with a facility approaching
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatism; these specimens, as also the trees scattered over the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,landscapes, show that Martian vegetation does not differ essentially
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from ours. Of the animals we do not know much. Astané has often with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him an ugly beast, which caused Hélène much fright on account of its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grotesque form—about two feet long, with a flat tail; it has the “head
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a cabbage,” with a big green eye in the middle (like the eye of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a peacock feather), and five or six pairs of paws, or ears all about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(see Fig. 18). This animal unites the intelligence of the dog with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stupidity of the parrot, since on the one hand it obeys Astané and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fetches objects at his command (we do not know how), while, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other hand, it knows how to write, but in a manner purely mechanical.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(We have never had a specimen of this handwriting). (See Fig. 18.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In fact, as to other animals, beyond the little black bird cited,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without description (text 20), and a species of female deer for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,purpose of nursing infants (text 36), Hélène saw only horrid aquatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beasts like big snails, which Astané caught by means of iron nets
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stretched over the surface of the water.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané’s property is enclosed by large red stones, on the border of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,water, where Hélène loves to retire with her guide to converse in peace
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and to recall to mind with him the ancient and melancholy memories of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their Hindoo existence; the general tone of these conversations is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entirely the same as that of her conversations with Leopold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is a mountain also of red rocks, where Astané possesses some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,excavated dwelling-places, a kind of grotto appropriate to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sorcerer-savant which he is.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 18. Astané’s ugly beast. The body and tail are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, rose-colored; the eye is green with a black centre; the head is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, blackish; the lateral appendices are brownish-yellow, covered, like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the whole body, with pink hair.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[Illustration: Fig. 11, Fig. 19
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Fig. 11. Astané. Yellow complexion, brown hair; brown sandals; roll
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of white paper in his hand; variegated costume, or red and white;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, brick-red belt and border. Fig. 19. Martian lamp, standing against a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, rose and blue-colored tapestry.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The corpse of Esenale, admirably preserved, is also to be seen there,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,among other things, about which the disincarnate Esenale sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,floats in “fluid” form, and which Hélène still finds soft to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,touch, when, after much hesitation, and not without fright, she gained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,courage to touch it with the end of her finger, at the invitation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané. It is also in this house, excavated in the rock, that Astané
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has his observatory, a pit traversing the mountain, by means of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he contemplates the heavens (text 9), our earth included, by means of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telescope, which the beast with the head of a cabbage brings him.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To these qualities of savant Astané joins those of wise counsellor and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of patriarchal governor. We also see a young girl named Matêmi coming
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to consult him frequently (texts 22 and 28), perhaps on matrimonial
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affairs, since Matêmi reappears on several occasions with her lover
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or her _fiancé_, Siké, and, among others, at a great family _fête_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presided over by Astané. (See Fig. 19.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following are some details concerning that vision, which occupied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the greater part of a seance (November 28, 1897). Hélène sees, in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vast, red, initial light, a Martian street appear, lighted neither by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lamps nor electricity, but by lights shining through small windows in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the walls of the houses. The interior of one of these houses becomes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visible to her: a superb, square hall, lighted at each angle by a kind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of lamp, formed of four superposed globes,—two blue and two white—not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of glass (Fig. 19); under each lamp a small basin, over which was a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kind of cornucopia pouring forth water. There were many ornamental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plants. In the middle of the hall, a grove, around which are placed a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,number of small tables with a polished surface like nickel. There are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,young people in Martian robes; young girls with long hair hanging down
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their backs, and wearing at the back of the head a head-dress of roses;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,colored blue or green butterflies attached to the neck.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There were at least thirty speaking Martian (but Hélène did not hear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them distinctly). Astané appeared “in a very ugly robe to-day,” and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,showed himself full of friendly gallantry towards the young girls. He
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seats himself alone at one of the tables while the young people take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their places at others, two couples at each. These tables are adorned
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with flowers different from ours: some blue, with leaves in the shape
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of almonds; others starry, and as white as milk, scented like musk;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,others, again, the most beautiful, have the form of trumpets, either
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blue or fire colored, with large rounded leaves, with black figures.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(See Fig. 20.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène hears Astané pronounce the name “Pouzé.” Then come two men in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long white trousers with a black sash; one wears a coat of rose color,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other a white one. They carry ornamented trays, and, passing in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,front of each table, they place square plates upon them, with forks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without handles, formed of three teeth an inch in length: for glasses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they had goblets like tea-cups, bordered with a silver thread. Then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they brought in a kind of basin a cooked animal resembling a cat, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is placed before Astané, who twists it and cuts it rapidly with his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fingers, tipped with sharp silver tips; square pieces are distributed,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,among the guests, on square plates with furrows around the edges for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the juice. Every one is filled with a wild gayety. Astané sits at each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table in succession, and the girls pass their hands through his hair.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,New plates are brought, and pink, white, and blue basins tipped with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flowers. These basins melt, and are eaten like the flowers. Then the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,guests wash their hands at little fountains in the corners of the room.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 10. Flying-machine held by Astané, emitting yellow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and red flames. [From the collection of M. Lemaître.]]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 20. Plant of Martian design. Fire-red flowers;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, violet-gray leaves.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Now one of the walls is raised, like the curtain of a theatre, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène sees a magnificent hall adorned with luminous globes, flowers,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and plants, with the ceiling painted in pink clouds on a pink sky, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,couches and pillows suspended along the walls. Then an orchestra of ten
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,musicians arrive, carrying a kind of gilded funnel about five feet in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,height, with a round cover to the large opening, and at the neck a kind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of rake, on which they placed their fingers. Hélène hears music like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that made by flutes and sees every one moving; they arrange themselves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by fours, make passes and gestures, then reunite in groups of eight.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They glide about gently, for it could not be called dancing. They do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not clasp each other’s waists, but place their hands on each other’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shoulders, standing some distance apart. It is terribly warm. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“boiling hot.” They stop, walk, talk, and it is then that Hélène hears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a tall young brunette (Matêmi) and a short young man (Siké) exchange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first words of text No. 20. Then they depart in the direction of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,large bush with red flowers (_tamiche_) and are soon followed by Ramié
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and his companion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At this moment the vision, which has lasted an hour and a quarter,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passes away. Hélène, who had remained standing during the whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,description, now enters into complete somnambulism, and Astané causes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her to write Martian phrases which she had heard and repeated a short
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time before. During the entire vision Leopold occupied her left hand,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which was hanging anæsthetically down her body, and replied by his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,index-finger to the questions which I asked in a low voice. I thus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,learned that this Martian scene was not a wedding, or any special
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ceremony, but a simple family _fête_; that it was no recollection or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,product of Hélène’s imagination but a reality actually passing on Mars:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it was not Leopold but Astané who furnished this vision and caused
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her to hear the music: that Leopold himself neither saw nor heard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anything of it all, yet knows all that Mlle. Smith sees and hears, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This résumé of a family _fête_, presided over by Astané, gives the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,measure of the originality of the people of Mars. The visions relating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to other incidents are of the same order: read the description of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian nursery (text 36), of the voyage in a _miza_ a sort of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automobile, the mechanism of which is entirely unknown to us (text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,23), of the operation of chirurgery (text 29), of the games of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little Anini (p. 176, etc.). We see always the same general mixture
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of imitation of things which transpire among us, and of infantile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,modifications of them in the minute details.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,POUZÉ RAMIÉ—VARIOUS PERSONAGES
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of the other personages who traverse the Martian visions we know too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little to waste much time upon them. The name of the one who appears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,most frequently is Pouzé. He is present at the banquet, and we meet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him also in the company of a poor little withered old man with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trembling voice, in connection with whom he occupies himself with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gardening or botany, in an evening promenade by the shore of the lake
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(text 14). He also figures again by the side of an unknown person named
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Paniné, and he has a son, Saïne, who had met with some accident to his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,head and had been cured of it, to the great joy of his parents (texts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,23 and 24).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Finally, we must devote a few words to Ramié, who manifests himself for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first time in October, 1898, as the revealer of the ultra-Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world, of which we shall soon take cognizance. Ramié seems to be a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relative of Astané, an astronomer, not so brilliant as Astané, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possessing the same privilege, which the ordinary Martians do not seem
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to enjoy, of being able to take hold of Hélène’s arm, and of writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with her hand. There is, to my mind, no fundamental difference between
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, Astané, and Ramié, in their relation to Hélène; they are only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a reproduction in triplicate of one identical emotional relation, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I do not think I am mistaken in regarding these three figures as three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very transparent disguises of the same fundamental personality, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is only a hypnoid subdivision of the real being of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is much wiser to leave to the future—if the Martian and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ultra-Martian romances continue to develop—the task of enlightening
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ourselves more completely as to the true character of Ramié. Possibly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some day we shall also know more concerning the couple called Matêmi
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and Siké, as well as many others, such as Sazéni, Paniné, the little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Bullié, Romé, Fédié, etc., of whom we now know scarcely more than their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,names, and understand nothing in regard to their possible relationships
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the central figures of Astané and Esenale.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,IV. CONCERNING THE AUTHOR OF THE MARTIAN ROMANCE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The general ideas which the Martian cycle suggests will most assuredly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,differ, according to whether it is considered as an authentic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revelation of affairs on the planet Mars, or only as a simple fantasy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the imagination of the medium; and meanwhile, holding, myself, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the second supposition, I demand from the Martian romance information
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in regard to its author rather than its subject-matter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are two or three points concerning this unknown author which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strike me forcibly:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: He shows a singular indifference—possibly it may be due to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ignorance—in regard to all those questions which are most prominent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the present time, I will not say among astronomers, but among
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,people of the world somewhat fond of popular science and curious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning the mysteries of our universe. The canals of Mars, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first place—those famous canals with reduplication—temporarily more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enigmatical than those of the Ego of the mediums; then the strips of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposed cultivation along their borders, the mass of snow around the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,poles, the nature of the soil, and the conditions of life on those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,worlds, in turn inundated and burning, the thousand and one questions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of hydrography, of geology, of biology, which the amateur naturalist
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inevitably asks himself on the subject of the planet nearest to us—of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all this the author of the Martian romance knows nothing and cares
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing. Questions of sociology do not trouble him to a much greater
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extent, since the people occupying the most prominent place in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian visions, and making the conversation, in no wise enlighten us
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to the civil and political organization of their globe, as to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fine arts and religion, commerce and industry, etc. Have the barriers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the nations fallen, and is there no longer a standing army up there,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,except that of the laborer occupied in the construction and maintenance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of that gigantic net-work of canals for communication or irrigation?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Esenale and Astané have not deigned to inform us. It seems probable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from certain episodes that the family is, as with us, at the foundation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Martian civilization; nevertheless, we have no direct or detailed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,information in regard to this subject. It is useless to speculate.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is evident that the author of this romance did not care much for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,science, and that, in spite of her desire to comply with the wishes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of M. Lemaître (see p. 149), she had not the least conception of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questions which arise in our day, in every cultivated mind, as to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,planet Mars and its probable inhabitants.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: If, instead of quarrelling with the Martian romance about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that which it fails to furnish us, we endeavor to appreciate the full
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,value of what it does give us, we are struck by two points, which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have already touched upon more than once in passing—viz., the complete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,identity of the Martian world, taken in its chief points, with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world in which we live, and its puerile originality in a host of minor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,details. Take, for example, the family _fête_ (p. 188). To be sure, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,venerable Astané is there saluted by a caress of the hair instead of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand-shake; the young couples while dancing grasp each other not by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waist but by the shoulder; the ornamental plants do not belong to any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,species known to us: but, save for these insignificant divergences from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our costumes and habits, as a whole, and in general tone, it is exactly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as with us.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The imagination which forged these scenes, with all their decoration,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is remarkably calm, thoughtful, devoted to the real and the probable.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The _miza_, which runs without a visible motor power, is neither more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nor less extraordinary to the uninitiated spectator than many of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the vehicles which traverse our roads. The colored globes placed in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an aperture of the walls of the houses to light the streets recall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strongly our electric lamps. Astané’s flying-machine will probably soon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be realized in some form or other. The bridges which disappear under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the water in order to allow boats to pass (text 25) are, save for a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,technical person, as natural as ours which accomplish the same result
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by lifting themselves in the air. With the exception of the “evocative”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,powers of Astané, which only concern Mlle. Smith personally and do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not figure in any Martian scene, there is nothing on Mars which goes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beyond what has been attained or might be expected to be accomplished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by ingenious inventors here below.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A wise little imagination of ten or twelve years old would have deemed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it quite droll and original to make people up there eat on square
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plates with a furrow for the gravy, of making an ugly beast with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,single eye carry the telescope of Astané to him, of making babies to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fed by tubes running directly to the breasts of animals like the female
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,deer, etc. There is nothing of the _Thousand and One Nights_, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_Metamorphoses_ of Ovid, fairy stories, or the adventures of Gulliver,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,no trace of ogres nor of giants nor of veritable sorcerers in this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole cycle. One would say that it was the work of a young scholar to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whom had been given the task of trying to invent a world as different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as possible from ours, but _real_, and who had conscientiously applied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself to it, loosening the reins of his childish fancy in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a multitude of minor points in the limits of what appeared admissible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to his short and narrow experience.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thirdly: By the side of these arbitrary and useless innovations the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian romance bears in a multitude of its characteristics a clearly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Oriental stamp, upon which I have already often insisted. The yellow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complexion and long black hair of Astané; the costume of all the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages—robes embroidered or of brilliant hues, sandals with thongs,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flat white hats, etc., the long hair of the women and the ornaments in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the form of butterflies for their coiffures; the houses of grotesque
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shapes, recalling the pagoda, kiosk, and minaret, the warm and glowing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,colors of the skies, the water, the rocks, and the vegetation (see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Figs. 13 and 14), etc.: all this has a sham air of Japanese, Chinese,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo. It is to be noted that this imprint of the extreme East is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,purely exterior, not in any wise penetrating to the characters or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manners of the personages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All the traits that I discover in the author of the Martian romance can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be summed up in a single phrase, its profoundly infantile character.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The candor and imperturbable naïveté of childhood, which doubts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing because ignorant of everything, is necessary in order for one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to launch himself seriously upon an enterprise such as the pretended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exact and authentic depictions of an unknown world. An adult, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,least cultivated and having some experience of life, would never waste
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time in elaborating similar nonsense—Mlle. Smith less than any one,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intelligent and cultivated as she is in her normal state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This provisional view of the author of the Martian cycle will find its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confirmation and its complement in the following chapters, in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we shall examine the Martian language, from which I have until now
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refrained.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER VI
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,          THE MARTIAN CYCLE (CONTINUED)—THE MARTIAN LANGUAGE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of the various automatic phenomena, the “speaking in tongues” is one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which at all times has most aroused curiosity, while at the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time little accurate knowledge concerning it has been obtainable, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,account of the difficulty of collecting correctly the confused and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unintelligible words as they gush forth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The phonograph, which has already been employed in some exceptional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cases, like that of Le Baron, will doubtless some day render
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inestimable service to this kind of study, but it leaves much still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be desired at the present moment, from the point of view of its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,practical utilization in the case of subjects not in their right mind,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who are not easily manageable, and who will not remain quiet long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enough while uttering their unusual words to allow the instrument to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adjusted and made ready.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are different species of glossolalia. Simple, incoherent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,utterances, in a state of ecstasy, interspersed with emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exclamations, which are sometimes produced in certain surcharged
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,religious environments, is another matter altogether from the creation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of neologisms, which are met with in the dream, in somnambulism,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mental alienation, or in children. At the same time this fabrication of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arbitrary words raises other problems—as, for example, the occasional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,use of foreign idioms unknown to the subject (at least, apparently),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but which really exist. In each of these cases it is necessary to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,examine further whether, and in what measure, the individual attributes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a fixed meaning to the sounds which he utters, whether he understands
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(or has, at least, the impression of understanding) his own words,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or whether it is only a question of a mechanical and meaningless
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,derangement of the phonetic apparatus, or, again, whether this jargon,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unintelligible to the ordinary personality, expresses the ideas of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some secondary personality. All these forms, moreover, vary in shades
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and degrees, and there are, in addition, those mixed cases, possibly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the more frequent, where all the forms are mingled and combined. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same individual, and sometimes in the course of the same spasm, also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exhibits a series of neologisms, comprehended or uncomprehended, giving
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,way to a simple, incoherent verbiage in common language, or vice versa,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A good description and rational classification of all these categories
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and varieties of glossolalia would be of very great interest. I cannot
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,think of attempting such a study here, having enough already to fully
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupy my attention, by reason of having involved myself with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian of Mlle. Smith. This somnambulistic language does not consist,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as we have already discovered, either in speaking ecstatically or in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,religious enthusiasm, nor yet in the use of a foreign language which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,really exists; it represents rather neologism carried to its highest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,expression and practised in a systematic fashion, with a very precise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signification, by a secondary personality unknown to the normal self.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is a typical case of “glosso-poesy,” of complete fabrication of all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the parts of a new language by a subconscious activity. I have many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,times regretted that those who have witnessed analogous phenomena—as,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for example, Kerner, with the _Seeress of Prevost_—have not gathered
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,together and published in their entirety all the products of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,singular method of performing their functions on the part of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verbal faculties. Undoubtedly each case taken by itself seems a simple
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anomaly, a pure arbitrary curiosity, and without any bearing; but who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knows whether the collection of a large number of these psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bibelots, as yet few enough in their total, would not end in some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unexpected light? Exceptional facts are often the most instructive.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In order to avoid falling into the same errors of negligence, not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowing where to stop, in case I wished to make a choice, I have taken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the course of setting forth here in full all the Martian texts which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we have been able to gather. I will have them follow a paragraph
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,containing certain remarks which that unknown language has suggested
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to me; but, very far from flattering myself that I have exhausted the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject, I earnestly hope that it will find readers more competent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than myself to correct and complete my observations, since I must
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,acknowledge that as a linguist and philologist I am very much like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an ass playing the flute. It is expedient, in beginning, to give
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some further details regarding the various psychological methods of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manifestation of that unknown tongue.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I. VERBAL MARTIAN AUTOMATISMS
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have described in the preceding chapter, and will not now return
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to it, the birth of the Martian language, indissolubly bound up with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of the romance itself, from the 2d of February, 1896, up to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inauguration of the process of translation by the entrance of Esenale
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the scene on the 2d of November following (see pp. 154-165).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,During several months thereafter the Martian language is confined to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the two psychological forms of apparition in which it seems to have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been clothed during the course of that first year.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: _Verbo-auditive_ automatism, hallucinations of hearing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanying visions in the waking state. In the case of spontaneous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions, Hélène notes in pencil, either during the vision itself or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately afterwards, the unintelligible sounds which strike her ear;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but to her great regret many of them escape her, since she is sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only able to gather the first or the last phrase of the sentences which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her imaginary personages address to her, or scattered fragments of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversations which she holds with herself; these fragments themselves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often contain inaccuracies, which are ultimately rectified at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moment of translation, Esenale having the good habit of articulating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very clearly each Martian word before giving its French equivalent.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the case of the visions which she has at the seances, Hélène slowly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeats the words she hears without understanding them, and the sitters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make note of them more or less correctly.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: _Vocal_ automatism (“verbo-motor hallucinations of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulation,” in the cumbersome official terminology). Here again it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is the sitters who gather as much as they can of the strange words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pronounced in a state of trance, but that is very little, since Hélène,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her Martian state, often speaks with a tremendous volubility.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Moreover, a distinction must be made between the relatively clear and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brief phrases which are later translated by Esenale, and the rapid and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confused gibberish the signification of which can never be obtained,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probably because it really has none, but is only a pseudo-language (see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pp. 154-159).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A new process of communication, the handwriting, made its appearance in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,August, 1897, with a delay of perhaps eighteen months as to the speech
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(the reverse of Leopold’s case, who wrote a long time before speaking).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is produced, also, under two forms, which constitute a pendant to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the two cases given above, and also complete the standard quartette of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the psychological modalities of language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thirdly: _Verbo-visual_ automatism—that is, apparitions of exotic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characters before Hélène’s eyes when awake, who copies them as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faithfully as possible in a drawing, without knowing the meaning of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mysterious hieroglyphics.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fourthly: _Graphic_ automatism—_i.e._, writing traced by the hand of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène while completely entranced and incarnating a Martian personage.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In this case the characters are generally smaller, more regular, better
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,formed than in the drawings of the preceding case. A certain number of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasions, when the name has been pronounced by Hélène before being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,written, and especially the articulation of Esenale at the moment of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation, have permitted the relations between her vocal sounds and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the graphic signs of the Martian language to be established.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is to be noted that these four automatic manifestations do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inflict an equal injury upon the normal personality of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As a rule, the verbo-auditive and verbo-visual hallucinations only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suppress her consciousness of present reality; they leave her a freedom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of mind which, if not complete, is at least sufficient to permit her to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observe in a reflective manner these sensorial automatisms, to engrave
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them on her memory, and to describe them or make a copy of them, while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she often adds remarks testifying to a certain critical sense. On the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contrary, the verbo-motor hallucinations of articulation or of writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seem to be incompatible with her preservation of the waking state, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are followed by amnesia. Hélène is always totally absent or entranced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while her hand writes mechanically, and if, as seldom happens, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaks Martian automatically, outside of the moments of complete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnation, she is not aware of it, and does not recollect it. This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incapacity of the normal personality of Mlle. Smith to observe at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time or remember afterwards her verbo-motor automatisms denotes a more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,profound perturbation than that she experiences during her sensory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatisms.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Martian handwriting only appeared at the end of a prolonged period
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of incubation, which betrayed itself in several incidents, and was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certainly stimulated by various exterior suggestions during a year
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a half at least. The following are the principal dates of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,development.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,February 16, 1896.—The idea of a special handwriting belonging to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,planet Mars occurs for the first time to Hélène’s astonishment in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian semi-trance (see p. 161).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,November 2.—Handwriting is clearly predicted in the phrase, “Astané
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will teach me to write,” uttered by Hélène in a Martian trance, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the scene of the translation by Esenale (see p. 166).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,November 8.—After the translation of text No. 3, Leopold, being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questioned, replies that Astané will write this text for Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but the prediction is not fulfilled.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,May 23, 1897.—The announcement of Martian handwriting becomes more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,precise. “Presently,” says Astané to Hélène, “thou wilt be able
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to trace our handwriting, and thou wilt possess in thy hands the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characters of our language” (text 12).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,June 20.—At the beginning of a seance, a Martian vision, she demands
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of an imaginary interlocutor “a large ring which comes to a point, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with which one can write.” This description applies to M. R., who has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with him some small pocket-pens of this kind, capable of being adjusted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the end of the index-finger.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,June 23.—I hand Hélène the two small pocket-pens which M. R. has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brought for her, but they do not please her. After trying to use one,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she throws it away and takes up a pencil, saying that if she must write
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian, the ordinary means will suffice as well as those peculiar
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pocket-pens. In about a minute she falls asleep, and her hand begins
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatically to trace a message in Leopold’s handwriting. I then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ask that individual whether the pocket-pens of M. R. do not meet the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exigencies of Martian, and whether Mlle. Smith will some day write
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that language, as has already been announced. Hélène’s hand thereupon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,responds in the beautiful calligraphy of Leopold: “I have not yet seen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the instrument which the inhabitants of the planet Mars use in writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their language, but I can and do affirm that the thing will happen, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has been announced to you.—LEOPOLD.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,June 27.—In the scene of the translation of text 15, Hélène adds to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,usual refrain, “Esenale has gone away; he will soon return; _he will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,soon write_.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,August 3.—Between four and five o’clock in the afternoon Hélène had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a vision at her desk, lasting ten or fifteen minutes, of a broad,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,horizontal bar, flame-colored, then changing to brick-red, and which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by degrees became rose-tinted, on which were a multitude of strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characters, which she supposes to be the Martian letters of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,alphabet, on account of the color. These characters floated in space
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before and round about her. Analogous visions occur in the course of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the weeks immediately following.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,August 22.—Hélène for the first time writes in Martian. After various
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,non-Martian visions Mlle. Smith turns away from the window (it rained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hard, and the sky was very gray) and exclaims, “Oh, look, it is all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,red! Is it already time to go to bed? M. Lemaître, are you there? Do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,you see how red it is? I see Astané, who is there, in that red; I only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,see his head and the ends of his fingers; he has no robe; and here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is the other (Esenale) with him. They both have some letters at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ends of their fingers on a bit of paper. Quick, give me some paper!”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A blank sheet and the pocket-pen are handed to her, which latter she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disdainfully throws down. She accepts an ordinary pencil, which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,holds in her customary fashion, between her middle and index-finger,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then writes from left to right the three first lines of Fig. 21,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,looking attentively towards the window at her fictitious model before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tracing each letter, and adding certain oral notes, according to which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there are some words which she sees written in black characters on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the three papers—or, more correctly, on three white wands, a sort of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,narrow cylinder, somewhat flattened out—which Astané, Esenale, and a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,third personage whose name she does not know but whose description
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corresponds with that of Pouzé, hold in their right hands. After which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she again sees another paper or cylinder, which Astané holds above his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,head, and which bears also some words which she undertakes to copy (the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three last lines of Fig. 21, p. 205). “Oh, it is a pity,” says she, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming to the end of the fourth line, “it is all on one line, and I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have no more room.” She then writes underneath the three letters of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,line 5, and without saying anything adds line 6. Then she resumes: “How
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dark it is with you ... the sun has entirely gone down” (it still rains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very hard). “No one more! nothing more!” She remains in contemplation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before that which she has written, then sees Astané again near the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table, who again shows her a paper, the same, she thinks, as the former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one. “But no, it is not altogether the same; there is one mistake, it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is there [she points to the fourth line towards the end] ... Ah, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not see more!” Then, presently she adds: “He showed me something
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,else; there was a mistake, but I was not able to see it. It is very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficult. While I was writing, it was not I myself, I could not feel
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my arms. It was difficult, because when I raised my head I no longer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saw the letters well. It was like a Greek design.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At this moment Hélène recovered from the state of obscuration, from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she emerged with difficulty, which had accompanied the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision and the automatic copy of the verbo-visual text. But a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,later in the evening she only vaguely remembered having seen strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letters, and was altogether ignorant of having written anything.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The very natural supposition that the three first words written were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the names of the known personages (Astané, Esenale, Pouzé), who bore
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them on their wands, led to the discovery of the meaning of many of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian characters and permitted the divining of the sense of the three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last words.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 21. Text No. 16; seance of August 22, 1897.—First
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Martian text written by Mlle. Smith (according to a visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hallucination). Natural size. [Collection of M. Lemaître.]—Herewith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, its French notation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    astane
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    esenale
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    pouze
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  mene simand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,          ini.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,     mira.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The new alphabet was enriched by certain other signs on the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,days, thanks to the echos of that seance in the ordinary life of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, who happened on several occasions to write not the true Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as yet, but French in Martian letters, to her great stupefaction when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she found herself after a while in the presence of these unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hieroglyphics.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 22. Examples of isolated French words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, (_française_, _lumière_, _prairie_) automatically traced in Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, characters by Mlle. Smith in her normal handwriting. See also Fig. 1,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, p. 56.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The first manifestation of that graphic automatism, being as yet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerned only with the form of the letters and not the vocabulary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dates from the day after the following seance:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,August 23.—“Here,” wrote Hélène to me at noon, sending me some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memoranda from which I have taken the three examples of Fig. 22—“here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are some labels which I made it my business to make this morning at ten
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,o’clock, and which I have not been able to finish in a satisfactory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manner. I have only just now emerged from the rose-colored fog in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have been continuously enwrapped for almost two hours.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Three weeks later a complete automatic Martian handwriting was produced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a seance at my house, of which the following is a summary.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,September 12, 1897.—At the end of a quite long Martian vision, Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith sees Astané, who has something at the end of his finger and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who signs to her to write. I offer her a pencil, and after various
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tergiversations she slowly begins to trace some Martian characters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(Fig. 23). Astané has possession of her arm, and she is, during this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time, altogether anæsthetic and absent. Leopold, on the contrary, is at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, and gives various indications of his presence. At the end of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sixth line she seems to half awaken, and murmurs, “I am not afraid; no,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I am not afraid.” Then she again falls into a dream in order to write
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the four last words (which signify “_Then do not fear_,” and which are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the response of Astané to her exclamation).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Almost immediately Leopold substitutes himself for Astané and traces
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the same sheet, in his characteristic handwriting (considerably
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distorted towards the end): “_Place thy hand on her forehead_,” by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,means of which he indicates to me that the time has arrived to pass on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the scene of translation by Esenale.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 23. Martian text No. 17; seance of September 12,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, 1897. Written by Mlle. Smith incarnating Astané (then Leopold for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, French words at the end). See the translation, p. 222. Too many _l_’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, at the end of the first line immediately produced the scrawls intended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, to strike them out. (Reproduction one-half natural size.)]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 24. Martian alphabet, summary of the signs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, obtained. (Never has been given as such by Mlle. Smith.)]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We may conclude from these successive stages that the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting is the result of a slow autosuggestion, in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea of a special writing instrument, and its handling, for a long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time played the dominant rôle, then was abandoned, without doubt, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impracticable to realize. The characters themselves then haunted for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several weeks Hélène’s visual imagination before they appeared to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the cylinders of the three Martians in a manner sufficiently clear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and stable to enable her to copy them and afterwards to be capable of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subduing her graphomotor mechanism. Once manifested outwardly, these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signs, which I have assembled under the form of an alphabet in Fig. 24,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have not varied for two years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Moreover, some trifling confusion, of which I shall speak a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,later, shows well that the personality which employs them is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absolutely separated from that of Hélène, although the latter, in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waking state, might hold the same relation to Martian which she holds
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to Chinese—that is, she knows its general very characteristic aspect,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but is ignorant of the signification of the characters, and would be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incapable of reading it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s Martian handwriting is not stereotyped, but presents,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to circumstances, some variations in form, especially in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,size of the letters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This may be established by Figs. 21 to 32, in which I have reproduced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the greater part of the texts obtained by writing. When the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gushes forth in verbo-visual hallucinations, Hélène transcribes it in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strokes of large dimensions, lacking firmness, full of repetitions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(Figs. 21, 26, 31), and she always remarks that the original, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is before her eyes, is much smaller and clearer than her copy. In the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,texts which have come automatically from her hand—_i.e._, supposedly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,traced by the Martians themselves—the handwriting is really smaller and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more precise. Here again are some curious differences. Astané has a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,calligraphy less voluminous than that of Esenale, and Ramié has a much
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finer one than Esenale (Figs. 28 and 29).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It would be altogether premature for me to launch myself upon the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,study of Martian graphology, and, therefore, leaving that line to my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,successors, I take up the texts which have been collected in their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chronological order.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,II. THE MARTIAN TEXTS
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is not always easy to represent a language and its pronunciation by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,means of the typographical characters of another. Happily the Martian,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in spite of its strange appearance and the fifty millions of leagues
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which separate us from the red planet, is in reality so near neighbor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to French that there is scarcely any difficulty in this case.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The dozen written texts[19] which we possess, and which Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,either copied from a verbo-visual hallucination, or which were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,traced by her hand in an access of graphomotor automatism, are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,readily translated into French, since each Martian letter has its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exact equivalent in the French alphabet. I have confined myself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to placing accents on the vowels (there are none in the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,writing), conformably to the pronunciation of Esenale at the moment of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation. It is only necessary to read the following texts aloud,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulating them as though they were French, in order to secure the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian words almost exactly as they proceed from the mouth of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith; I say _almost_, because there still remains, naturally, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the speech of Esenale, as in that of every one, a special mannerism
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of strengthening certain syllables and slurring others—in short,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of delicate shades of accentuation, which cannot be adequately
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,represented, and which the hearers did not attempt to take note of at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the auditive or vocal texts, those which have not been obtained by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,writing, I have adopted the more probable orthography, according to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pronunciation of Esenale, but (with the exception of words known by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,means of the written texts) I naturally cannot guarantee their absolute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correctness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The manner in which Hélène takes down in pencil the Martian phrases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which strike her ear is not of great assistance to us in that respect,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,because, as I have said above (p. 158), she finds herself at the time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these verbo-auditive hallucinations in the situation of a person who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hears some unknown words, and spells them as well as she is able, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a quite arbitrary and often faulty fashion. She writes, for example,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“=hezi darri né ciké taisse=,” which, according to the pronunciation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Esenale and other written texts, should be “=êzi darié siké tés=”;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or, again, “=misse messe as si lé=,” instead of “=mis mess ass ilé=.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We cannot, therefore, depend upon the orthography of Hélène, but I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,naturally followed it in every case in which there seemed to be no good
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reason to depart from it. In stating that the following texts should be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulated like French, two remarks must be added: First, the final
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consonant, very rare in Martian, is always aspirated; the word =ten=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is pronounced as in the French _gluten_; =essat=, like _fat_; =amès=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like _aloes_; =mis= and =mess=, like _lis_ (flower), and mess (of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,officer), etc. In the second place, for the different values of the _e_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have adopted the following rule: the _e_ broad is always indicated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the accent grave _è_; the _e_ medium, which is only found at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning and in the middle of a word, is marked with the acute accent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_é_; the _e_ short, by the acute accent at the end of a word (or before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a final _e_ mute), and by the circumflex at the beginning or in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,middle; the _e_ mute, or demi-mute, remains without accent.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The pronunciation, therefore, will be, for example, the _e_’s of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian words =mété=, =bénézee=, like those of the French words _été_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_répétée_; =êvé=, like _rêvé_, =tès=, as in _Lutèce_, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There will be found in italics, underneath the Martian texts, their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French equivalents, word for word, as given by Esenale in the manner
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,described above (see pp. 166-168).[20] I have also indicated the kind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of automatism—auditive, visual, vocal, or graphic—by means of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,each text was obtained, also the date of its appearance, and (in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,parentheses) that of the seance, often quite remote, at which it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translated. I have also added such explanations as seemed to me to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,necessary.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  1. =métiche C.=   =médache C.=  =métaganiche S.=   =kin’t’che=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,     _Monsieur C._  _Madame C._   _Mademoiselle S._  _quatre_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        Mr. C.        Mrs. C.          Miss C.         Four.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vocal. February 2, 1896. See above, p. 157.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  2. =dodé né ci haudan té mess métiche astané ké dé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Ceci est la maison du grand homme Astané que tu_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =mé véche.=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _as vu._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, This is the house of the great man Astané, whom thou hast seen.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. About September 20, 1896 (translated November 2).—Heard by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène at the same time at which she had the vision of Fig. 12 (see p.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,166).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  3. =modé iné cé di cévouitche ni êvé ché kiné liné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Mère adorée, je te reconnais et suis ton petit Linet._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Adored mother, I recognize thee, and am thy little Linet.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Words addressed to Mme. Mirbel by her son Alexis (Esenale) in a scene
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of incarnation altogether analogous to that described on p. 156.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  4. =i modé mété modé modé iné palette is=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _O mère, tendre mère, mère bien-aimée, calme tout_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ché péliché ché chiré né ci ten ti vi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _ton souci, ton fils est près de toi._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Oh, mother, tender mother, dearly loved mother, calm all thy care, thy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, son is near thee.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vocal. November 29, 1896 (translated same seance).—Spoken by Esenale
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and addressed to Mme. Mirbel, in a scene of incarnation analogous to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the preceding. At the moment of translation, Esenale repeated, very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinctly, the last words, as follows: “=né ci=, _est près_ [“is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,near”], =ten ti vi=, _de toi_ (“thee”).” This was evidently an error,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,since it appears from numerous later texts that _est près de toi_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corresponds to =né ten ti vi=; it follows that it would be natural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to translate the word =ci= by _là_, _ici_, or _tout_, if these words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had not been differently rendered in other texts. (A confusion of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adverb _là_ with the article _la_, translated by =ci= in text 2, might
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also be suspected.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  5. =i kiché ten ti si ké di êvé dé étéche mêné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Oh! pourquoi près de moi ne te tiens-tu toujours, amie_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =izé bénézée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _enfin retrouvée!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Oh! Why dost thou not keep thyself always near me, friend, at last
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, found again?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. December 4, 1896 (translated December 13). Fragment of a long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discourse by Astané to Hélène, during an apparition which she had of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him about nine o’clock in the evening, as she was about to go to bed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This sentence, which he uttered twice, is the only one which she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been able to recall with sufficient precision to note down immediately
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after the vision. She has the feeling of having understood Astané’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole discourse while he was delivering it, and thinks she would have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been able to translate it into French, perhaps not word for word, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in its general sense. She expected to transcribe it the following day,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but in the morning when she awoke she was unable to recall either the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words of Astané or their meaning, not even that of this sentence,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,written on the previous evening. Heard again, as the second part of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following text, in the seance of the 13th of December.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  6. =ti iche cêné éspênié ni ti êzi atèv astané êzi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _De notre belle “Espénié” et de mon être Astané, mon_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =érié vizé é vi... i kiché ten ti si ké di êvé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _âme descend à toi... oh! pourquoi près de moi ne te tiens-tu_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =dé étéche mêné izé bénézée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _toujours, amie enfin retrouvée!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, From our beautiful “Espénié” and from my being Astané, my soul
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, descends to thee—Oh! why dost thou not keep thyself always near to me,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, friend, at last found again?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. December 13, 1896 (translated same seance).—Heard in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,far-away voice of Astané, Hélène having all the while a painful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensation, as though the skin of her face around her eyes, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,back of her wrists and hands, was being torn off. In the translation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the word _Espénié_ remains as it is, being a proper name; the left
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,index-finger (Leopold) points heavenward, and says that it might be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rendered by _terre_, _planète_, _demeure_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  7. =cé êvé plêva ti di bénèz éssat riz tès midée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Je suis chagrin de te retrouver vivant sur cette laide_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =durée cé ténassé riz iche éspênié vétéche ié ché atèv hêné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _terre; je voudrais sur notre Espénié voir tout ton être s’élever_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ni pové ten ti si éni zée métiché oné gudé ni zée darié=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _et rester près de moi; ici les hommes sont bons et les cœurs_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =grêvé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _larges._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, I am sorry to find you again living on this wretched earth; I would on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, our Espénié see all thy being raise itself and remain near me; here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, men are good and hearts large.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. December 15, 1896 (translated January 17, 1897).—Words spoken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by Astané to Hélène in a morning vision. The following fragment of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letter in which she sent me this text merits being cited as an example
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of those quite frequent cases in which Mlle. Smith, without knowing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the exact translation of the foreign words, nevertheless divines
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their general signification and comprehends them by their emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equivalent. “This morning, at a quarter before six, I saw Astané at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,foot of my bed. The general sense of his language was at that moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quite clear to my mind, and I give it to you as I understood it—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is, in as clear a manner as possible, having noted it down afterwards:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,‘How much I regret your not having been born in our world; you would be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much happier there, since everything is much better with us, people as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well as things, and I would be so happy to have you near me.’ That is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about what it seemed to me to mean; perhaps some day we may be able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be sure of it.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  8. =amès mis tensée ladé si—amès ten tivé avé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Viens un instant vers moi, viens près d’un vieil_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =men—koumé ié ché pélésse—amès somé têsé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _ami fondre tout ton chagrin: viens admirer ces_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =misaïmé—ké dé surès pit châmi—izâ méta ii=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _fleurs, que tu crois sans parfum, mais pourtant si_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =borêsé ti finaïmé—iâ izi dé séïmiré=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _pleines de senteurs!... Mais si tu comprendras!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Come towards me a moment, come near an old friend to melt away all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, thy sorrow; come to admire these flowers, which you believe without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, perfume, but yet so full of fragrance! But if thou couldst understand.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive and vocal. January 31, 1897 (translated same seance).—Hélène,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in hemisomnambulism, sees Astané, who tells her to repeat his words;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she replies to him: “But speak plainly ... I will gladly repeat them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,... but I do not understand very well....” Then she pronounces slowly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and very distinctly the foregoing text, in groups of words, separated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by a moment of silence (marked in the text by the sign—). It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarked that these groups, with the exception of the sixth, correspond
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the hemistiches of the French translation obtained in the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance. After the sixth group Hélène remains silent for a long time,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and finally says: “I cannot understand;” then utters the four last
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words, which are the reply of Astané to her objection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  9. =ané éni ké éréduté cé ilassuné té imâ ni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _C’est isi que, solitaire, ie m’approche du ciel et_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =bétiné chée durée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _regarde ta terre._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, It is here that, alone, I bring myself near to heaven and look upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the earth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. February 24, 1897 (translated March 14).—Reclining in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,easy-chair, after the noonday meal, Hélène hears this sentence, while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the same time she has the vision of a house, constructed by digging
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into a Martian mountain, and traversed by a sort of air-shafts, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which represents Astané’s observatory.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  10. =simandini lé lâmi mêné kizé pavi kiz atimi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Simandini, me voici! amie! quelle joie, quel bonheur!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Simandini, here I am! friend! what joy! what happiness!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. March 14, 1897 (translated same seance).—See following text.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  11. =i modé duméïné modé kêvi cé mache povini=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _O mère, ancienne mère, quand je peux arriver_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =poénêzé mûné é vi saliné éziné mimâ nikaïné modé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _quelques instants vers toi j’oublie mes parents Nikaïné, mère!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =—i men=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _—ô ami!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Oh, mother, former mother, when I can arrive a few instants near thee,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, I forget my parents Nikaïné, mother!—Oh friend!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vocal. March 14, 1897 (translated same seance).—From the beginning of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this seance Hélène complained of cold hands, then a great desire to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weep, and of a buzzing in the ears, which kept increasing and in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she finally heard Astané address to her the Martian words of text 10.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Immediately after she passes into full somnambulism; her respirations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very short and panting, rise to three per second, accompanied by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,synchronous movements of the left index-finger; then she stops suddenly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with a long expiration, immediately followed by a deep inspiration:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then her breast heaves, her face assumes an expression of suffering,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the left index-finger announces that it is Esenale (Alexis Mirbel)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who is incarnated. After a series of spasms and hiccoughs, Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arises, and, placing herself behind Mme. Mirbel, takes her neck in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hands, bows her head upon hers, tenderly pats her cheek, and addresses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her the words of text No. 11 (except the two last words). Then she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,raises her head, and again, with panting respiration (accelerated to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thirty inspirations in sixteen seconds), walks towards M. Lemaître
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(whose pupil Alexis Mirbel had been at the time of his death). She
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,places her hands upon his shoulders, affectionately grasps his right
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, and with emotion and continued sobbing addresses to him the two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words =i men!= After which she goes through the pantomime of extending
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her hand to Leopold and of allowing him to conduct her to a couch,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,where the translation of texts Nos. 10, 11, and 9 is obtained by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,customary process, but not without difficulty.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  12. =lassuné ké nipuné ani tis dé machir mirivé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Approche, ne crains pas; bientôt tu pourras tracer_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =iche manir sé dé évenir toué chi amiché zé forimé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _notre écriture, et tu posséderas dans tes mains les marques_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ti viche tarviné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _de notre langage._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Approach, fear not; soon thou wilt be able to trace our writing, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, thou wilt possess in thy hands the signs of our language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. May 23, 1897 (translated same seance).—Shortly after the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning of the seance, Hélène, still being awake, has a vision of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané, who addresses her in these words, which she repeats slowly and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a feeble voice. I give the text as it was heard and uniformly noted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by several sitters, both at the moment of its utterance and at its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subsequent translation. Many corrections, however, would be necessary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in order to make it correspond with the later written texts: =ké nipuné
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ani=, _et ne crains pas_ (“and I am not afraid,” or, “and I do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fear”) should be changed to =kié nipuné ani=, _ne crains pas_ (see text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,17); =sé= or =cé= only stands here for _et_, which everywhere else is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,given as =ni=; =viche= is used in error for =iche= (unless the =v= was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,added for the sake of euphony, of which there is no other example) and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=tis= for =tiche=.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  13. (adèl) =ané sini= (yestad) =i astané cé fimès astané mirâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _C’est vous, ô Astané, je meurs! Astané, adieu!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, It is you, oh Astané, I am dying! Astané, farewell!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vocal. Same seance as the preceding text, after which Hélène passes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into full somnambulism, begins to weep, pants, holds her hand on her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heart, and pronounces this sentence, mingling with it the two words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_Adèl_ and _yestad_, which are not Martian, but belong to the Oriental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cycle; they also do not appear in the text as it was repeated at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the time of its translation. This intrusion of terms foreign to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian dream is explained by the imminence of a Hindoo scene ready to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appear, which occupied the latter half of the seance in which the Arab
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,servant, Adèl, plays a leading rôle. The mingling of the two romances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is greatly accentuated a few moments later, in a long discourse,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,devoid of _r_’s and very rich in sibilants, and spoken with so great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,volubility that it was impossible to gather a single word. At the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time of the translation, at the close of the seance, this tirade was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeated with the same rapidity, preventing any notation; according to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the French translation which followed, it concerned memories of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life of Simandini which Hélène recalled to Astané and in which there is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much mention of the aforesaid Adèl (see Hindoo Cycle, Chap. VII.).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  14. =eupié zé palir né amé arvâ nini pédriné évaï=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Eupié, le temps est venu; Arva nous quitte; sois_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =diviné lâmée ine vinâ té luné—pouzé men hantiné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _heureux jusque au retour du jour.—Pouzé, ami fidèle_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =êzi vraïni né touzé med vi ni ché chiré saïné—ké=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _mon désir est même pour toi et ton fils Saïné.—Que_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =zalisé téassé mianiné ni di daziné—eupié—pouzé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _l’élément entier t’enveloppe et te garde!—Eupié!—Pouzé!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Eupié, the time has come; Arva leaves us; be happy till the return
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of the day. Pouzé, faithful friend, my wish is even for thee,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and thy son Saïné.—May the entire element envelop thee and guard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, thee!—Eupié!—Pouzé!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. June 18, 1897 (translated June 20).—During a visit I made to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith she has a vision of two Martian personages walking on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shore of a lake, and she repeats this fragment of their conversation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she has heard. According to another text (No. 20), Arva is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian name of the sun.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  15. =modé tatinée cé ké mache radziré zé tarvini va=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Mère chérie, je ne puis prononcer le langage où_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =nini nini triménêni ii adzi cé zé seïmiré vétiche i=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _nous nous comprenions si bien! Je le comprends cependant; ô_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =modé inée kévi bérimir m hed kévi machiri cé di triné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _mère adorée, quand reviendra-t-il? Quand pourrai-je te parler_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ti éstotiné ni bazée animina i modé cé méï adzi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _de ma dernière et courte existence? O mére, je t’ai bien_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ilinée i modé inée cé ké lé nazère ani—mirâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _reconnue, ô mère adorée, je ne me trompe pas!—Adieu_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =modé itatinée mirâ mirâ mirâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _mère chérie, adieu, adieu, adieu!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, My dearest, I cannot pronounce the language in which we understood
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, each other so well! I understand it, however; oh! adored mother, when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, will it return? When shall I be able to speak to thee of my last
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and short existence? Oh! mother, I have well recognized thee, oh!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, adored mother, I am not mistaken!—Farewell, dearest mother, farewell,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, farewell, farewell!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. June 27, 1897 (translated same seance).—Mme. Mirbel being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present, Hélène perceives Esenale, who remains in the vicinity of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mother and addresses these words to her. The “adieux” at the close
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were not spoken at that time, but were uttered by Esenale immediately
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following and as a complement of the translation; this is the only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,case (outside of text 36) in which he did not confine himself strictly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the texts already gathered and in which he permitted himself to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,introduce a new phrase, which otherwise does not contain a single
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown word; =itatinée=, _chérie_, is evidently a slip which should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be corrected either to =tatinée=, _chérie_, or to =it atinée=, _ô
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chérie_. The precise French equivalent of =triménêni= is probably
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_entretenions_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *16. =astané ésenâle pouzé mêné simandini mirâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  (_Astané. Esenale. Pouzé. Amie Simandini, adieu!_)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Astané. Esenale. Pouzeé. Friend Simandini, farewell!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Visual. August 22, 1897.—This text, for which there is no need of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a translation, constitutes the first appearance of the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting. See above, Fig. 21, and the résumé of that seance, pp.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,203-205.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *17. =taniré mis méch med mirivé éziné brimaξ ti tès=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Prends un crayon pour tracer mes paroles de cet_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =tensée—azini dé améir mazi si somé iche nazina=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _instant. Alors tu viendras avec moi admirer notre nouveau_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =tranéï.—Simandini cé kié mache di pédriné tès luné ké cé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _passage. Simandini, je ne puis te quitter ce jour. Que je_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =êvé diviné—patrinèz kié nipuné ani=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _suis heureux!—Alors ne crains pas!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Take a pencil to trace my words of this moment. Then thou wilt come
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, with me to admire our new passage. Simandini, I cannot leave thee this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, day. How happy I am!—Then fear not!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Graphic. September 12, 1897 (translated same seance).—See p. 207 and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 23.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *18. =modé tatinée lâmi mis mirâ ti ché bigâ kâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Mère chérie, voici un adieu de ton enfant qui_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ébrinié sanâ é vi idé di zé rénir—zé mess métich kâ é=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _pense tant à toi. On te le portera, le grand homme qui a_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =zé valini iminé—ni z [é]  grani sidiné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _le visage mince et le corps maigre._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, My dearest, this is a farewell from thy child, who thinks so much of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, thee. The big man, who has a thin face and a slender body, will bear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, it to thee.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 25. Text No. 18 (October 10, 1897), written in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, pencil by Mlle. Smith, incarnating Esenale. Reproduction in autotype
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, two-thirds of the natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 26. Text No. 26 (August 21, 1898), which appeared
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in visual hallucination, and was copied by Mlle. Smith. Reproductions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in autotype.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive, then Graphic. October 10, 1897 (translated same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance).—Hélène has a vision of a Martian landscape, in which Esenale
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,floats discarnate around the plants and speaks these words, which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeats. (It is understood from the translation that this text was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intended for Mme. Mirbel, who was then in the country, but to whom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the person very clearly indicated by the final characteristic was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about to pay a visit and could carry the message.) I then offer Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a pencil in the hope of obtaining this same text in writing; after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,various tergiversations and grimaces, denoting a state of increasing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism, she finally takes the pencil between her index and middle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fingers, tells Esenale that she still sees him and makes him sit down
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by her side, and then begins to write, completely absent and fascinated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the paper. The left index-finger (Leopold) informs us that it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Esenale himself who is writing by means of Hélène’s arm. Twice she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interrupts herself in order to say to Esenale, “Oh! do not go yet, stay
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a little while longer!” She appears nervous and agitated, and often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stops writing to stab her paper with her pencil or to make erasures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or scribble on it (see Fig. 25); in the =zé= of the last line, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forgets the =é= (this did not prevent Esenale from pronouncing the word
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correctly at the time of its translation).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[Illustration: Fig. 25. Text No. 18 (October 10, 1897), written in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pencil by Mlle. Smith, incarnating Esenale. Reproduction in autotype
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two-thirds of the natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[Illustration: Fig. 26. Text No. 26 (August 21, 1898), which appeared
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in visual hallucination, and was copied by Mlle. Smith. Reproductions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in autotype.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *19. =m[en] cé kié mache di triné sandiné téri=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  (_Amie, je ne puis te parler longtemps comme_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =né êzi vraïni zou réch mirâ milé piri mirâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _est mon désir; plus tard, adieu     adieu._)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, (Friend, I cannot speak to thee a long time, as is my desire; later,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, farewell, farewell!)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Graphic, then Auditive. October 24, 1897 (there has never been any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation of this text, two words of which are still unknown).—Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first sees the table illumined by a green light in which some designs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appear which she copies, and which give this text, except the two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last letters of the first word, the place of which remains blank.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Immediately after she hears Martian spoken, which she repeats. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same text; then she has a vision of Astané, Esenale, and a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,girl whose name she hears as Niké; but this soon gives way to other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,non-Martian somnambulisms. (See Fig. 25.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *20. =Siké évaï diviné zé niké crizi capri né amé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Siké, sois heureux! Le petit oiseau noir est venu_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =orié antéch é êzé carimi ni êzi érié é nié pavinée hed=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _frapper hier à ma fenêtre, et mon âme a été joyeuse; il_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =lé sadri dé zé véchir tiziné Matêmi misaïmé kâ lé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _me chanta: tu le verras demain.—Matêmi, fleur qui me_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =amèz essaté Arvâ ti éziné udâniξξ amès tès uri amès=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _fais vivre, soleil de mes songes, viens ce soir, viens_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =sandiné ten ti si évaï divinée Romé va né Siké=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _longtemps près de moi; sois heureuse!—Romé où est Siké?—Là-bas,_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =atrizi ten té taméch épizi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _près du “taméche” rose._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Siké, be happy! The little black bird came yesterday rapping at my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, window, and my soul was joyful; he sang to me: Thou wilt see him
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, to-morrow. Matêmi, flower which makes me live, sun of my dreams, come
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, this evening; come for a long time to me; be happy!—Romé, where is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Siké?—Yonder, near the “taméche” rose.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive, then Graphic. November 28, 1897 (translated same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance).—Fragments of conversation heard during the vision of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian _fête_ described on p. 185. Siké (a young man) and Matêmi (a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,young girl) form the first couple who pass by and walk off in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,direction of a large bush with red flowers (=taméche=); then a second
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,couple exchange the last words of the text while going to rejoin the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first. After this vision, which she contemplated standing and described
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with much animation, Hélène seated herself and began to write the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian phrases. It is ascertained from Leopold that it was Astané
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who held her hand (in holding the pencil between the thumb and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,index-finger—that is, after the manner of Leopold and not that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène as she had held it in writing text No. 17). The writing being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finished, Leopold directs that Hélène shall be made to seat herself on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the couch for the scene of translation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  21. =véchêsi têsée polluni avé métiche é vi ti=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Voyons cette question, vieux homme; à toi de_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =bounié seïmiré ni triné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _chercher, comprendre et parler._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Now this question, old man; it is for thee to seek, to understand and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, speak.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. January 15, 1898 (translated February 13).—Fragment of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversation between two Martian personages seen in a waking vision.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  22. =astané cé amès é vi chée brimi messé téri=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Astané, je viens à toi; ta sagesse grande comme_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ché pocrimé lé...=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _ton savoir me..._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Astané, I come to thee; thy great wisdom as well as thy knowledge to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, me....
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. About January 25, 1898 (translated February 13).—Vision,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at six o’clock in the morning, of a young Martian girl (Matêmi?)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,traversing a tunnel through a mountain and arriving at the house of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané, to whom she addresses this utterance, followed by many others
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Hélène could not grasp with sufficient distinctness to note them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,down.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  23. [A] =paniné évaï kirimé zé miza ami grini=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Panine, sois prudent, le “miza” va soulever;_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ké chée éméche rès pazé—=[B] =pouzé tès luné soumini=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _que ta main se retire!—Pouzé, ce jour riant..._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =arvâ ii cen zé primi ti ché chiré kiz pavi luné—=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Arva si beau... le revoir de ton fils... quel heureux jour—_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  [C] =saïné êzi chiré izé lineï kizé pavi êzi mané=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Saïné, mon fils, enfin debout! quelle joie!... Mon père_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ni êzé modé tiziné êzi chiré êzi mané cé êvé adi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _et ma mère... Demain, mon fils... Mon père, je suis bien_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =anâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _maintenant._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Paniné, be prudent, the “miza” is about to arise; remove thy hand!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Pouzé, this laughing day ... Arva so beautiful ... The return of thy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, son ... What happy day—Saïné, my son, finally standing! What joy!...
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, My father and my mother ... To-morrow, my son ... My father, I am well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, now.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. February 20, 1898 (translated same seance).—Very complicated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian vision. First, three small, movable houses, like pavilions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or Chinese kiosks, going about on little balls; in one of these, two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown personages, one of whom puts her hand out of a small oval
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,window, which occasions, on the part of her companion, the observation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the first sentence (A) of the text; at this instant, in fact, these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rolling pavilions (=miza=) assume an oscillatory movement, which makes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a noise like “tick-tack,” and then glide like a train upon rails. They
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,go around a high red mountain and come into a sort of magnificent gorge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or ravine, with slopes covered with extraordinary plants, and where
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they find white houses on an iron framework resembling piles. The two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,men then alight from their “=miza=,” chatting together, but Hélène can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only hear fragments (B) of their conversation. A young man of sixteen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to eighteen years of age comes to meet them, who has his head tied up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a kind of nightcap, and having no hair on the left side. Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,salutations are exchanged; they mutually strike their heads with their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hands, etc. Hélène complains of hearing very confusedly that which they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are saying, and can only repeat ends of sentences (C). She has pain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her heart, and Leopold dictates to me by the left index-finger,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_Put her to sleep_,” which presently leads to the customary scene of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation of the text.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  24. =saïné êzi chiré iée êzé pavi ché vinâ ine ruzzi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Saïné, mon fils, toute ma joie, ton retour au milieu_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ti nini né mis mess assilé atimi... itéche...=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _de nous est un grand, immense bonheur... toujours..._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =furimir... nori=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _aimera... jamais._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Saïné, my son, all my joy; thy return to our circle is a great, an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, immense happiness ... always will love ... ever.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. March 11, 1898 (translated August 21).—“Yesterday morning,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on jumping out of bed,” wrote Hélène to me, when sending me this text,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I had a vision of Mars, almost the same as that which I had before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(at the seance of February 20). I saw again the rolling pavilions, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,houses on piling, several personages, among them a young man who had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,no hair on one side of his head. I was able to note some words. It was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very confused, and the last words were caught on the wing, when here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and there something a little clear came to me....”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  25. =dé véchi ké ti éfi mervé éni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Tu vois que de choses superbes ici._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Thou seest what superb things (are) here.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. August 21, 1898 (translated same seance).—Waking vision of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,river between two rose-colored mountains, with a bridge (like that in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 9) which lowered itself into the water and disappeared in order to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,allow five or six boats to pass (like that in Fig. 13), then reappeared
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and was restored to its place. As Hélène describes all this, she hears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a voice speaking to her the above Martian words of the text.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *26. =Astané né zé ten ti vi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Astané est là près de toi._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Astané is there, near to thee.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Visual. August 21, 1898 (translated same seance).—Following the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preceding scene: Hélène perceives “in the air” (illumined and red—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her Martian vision) some characters unknown to her, which she copies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(see Fig. 26). I ask her, showing her the word =zé= (which elsewhere
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always stands for _le_), if she is not mistaken. She verifies it by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comparing it with the imaginary model before her and affirms it to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correct.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  27. =siké kiz crizi hantiné hed é ébrinié rès amêré é=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Siké, quel oiseau fidèle! il a pensé se réunir à_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =nini éssaté ti iche atimi matêmi hantiné hed né=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _nous, vivre de notre bonheur!—Matêmi fidèle, il est_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =hantiné êzi darié siké tès ousti ké zé badêni lassuné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _fidèle mon cœur!—Siké, ce bateau que le vent approche_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =mazi trimazi hed é ti zi mazêté é poviné é nini zé priâni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _avec force! il a de la peine à arriver à nous; le flot_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =é fouminé ivraïni idé é ti zi mazêté é vizêné zé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _est puissant aujourd’hui; on a de la peine à distinguer le_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =chodé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _“chodé.”_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 27. Text No. 28 (October 8, 1898), written by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Mlle. Smith, copying a text of Matêmi, seen in a visual hallucination.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [The slight tremor of some of the lines is not in the original, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, occurred in the copying of the text in the ink, which was written in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, pencil and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, too pale for reproduction.]]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Siké, what (a) faithful bird! he has thought to reunite himself to us,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, to live of our happiness!—Matêmi faithful, my heart is faithful!—Siké,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, this boat which the wind brings near with force! it has some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, difficulty in reaching us; the current is strong to-day; one has some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, difficulty in distinguishing the “=chodé=.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. About the 4th of September, 1898 (translated October
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,16).—Hélène heard and noted this phrase at the same time at which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had the vision of the two young Martian people who were walking in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kind of flower-garden, and saw a boat arrive, like that in Fig. 13. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of =chodé= has not been ascertained.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *28. =men mess Astané cé amès é vi itéch li tès=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Ami grand Astané, je viens à toi toujours par cet_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =alizé néümi assilé kâ ianiné êzi atèv ni lé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _élément mystérieux, immense, qui enveloppe mon étre et me_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =tazié é vi med iéeξ éziné rabriξ ni tibraξ. men amès di=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _lance à toi pour toutes mes pensées et besoins. Ami, viens te_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ouradé ké Matêmi uzénir chée kida ni ké chée brizi pi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _souvenir que Matêmi attendra ta faveur, et que ta sagesse lui_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =dézanir. évaï diviné tès luné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _répondra. Sois heureux ce jour._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Friend great Astané, I come to thee always by this element,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, mysterious, immense, which envelops my being and launches me to thee
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, by all my thoughts and desires. Friend, come thou to remember that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Matêmi will await thy favor, and that thy wisdom will answer him. Be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, happy to-day.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Visual. October 3, 1898 (translated October 16).—At a quarter before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nine in the evening Mlle. Smith, desiring to obtain a communication
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from Leopold for herself and her mother, sat down in an easy-chair and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gave herself up to meditation. Presently she hears the voice of Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telling her that he cannot manifest himself that evening, but that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,something much more interesting and important is being made ready. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,room seems to her to become completely obscured, except the end of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table at which she is sitting, which is illumined with a golden light.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A young Martian girl in a yellow robe and with long tresses then comes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and seats herself beside her and begins to trace, without ink or paper,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but with a point on the end of her index-finger, black figures on a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,white cylinder, at first placed on the table, afterwards on her knees,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and which is unrolled as she writes. Hélène is near enough to see the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characters clearly, and copies them in pencil on a sheet of paper (see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 27), after which the vision vanishes and her mother and the room
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reappear.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  29. =sazêni kiché nipunêzé dodé né pit léziré bèz=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Sazeni pourquoi craindre? Ceci est sans souffrance ni_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =neura évaï dastrée firêzi zé bodri né dorimé zé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _danger, sois paisible; certainement le os est sain, le_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =pastri tubré né tuxé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _sang seul est malade._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Sazeni, why fear? This is without suffering or danger, be peaceful;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, certainly the flesh is well, the blood alone is ill.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. October 14, 1898 (translated October 16).—Morning vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of an unknown gentleman and lady, the latter having her arm, spotted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with red, applied to an instrument with three tubes placed on a shelf
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fastened to the wall. These words were spoken by the man; the lady said
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  30. =modé ké hed oné chandêné têsé mûné ten ti= _Mère, que ils sont
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  délicieux ces moments près de_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =vi bigâ va bindié idé ti zâmé tensée zou réche= _toi!—Enfant, où
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  trouve on de meilleurs instants? plus tard_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =med ché atèv kiz fouminé zati= _pour ton être quel puissant souvenir._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Mother, how delightful they are, these moments near to thee!—Child,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, where finds one better moments? later for thy being what (a) powerful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, remembrance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. October 22, 1898 (translated December 18).—“At a quarter-past
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,six in the morning; vision of a pebbly shore; earth of a red tint;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immense sheet of water, of a bluish green. Two women are walking side
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by side. This was all I could gather of their conversation.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 28. Text No. 31 (October 27, 1898), written by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Mlle. Smith, incarnating Ramié. Natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *31. =Râmié bisti ti Espênié ché dimé ûni zi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Ramié habitant de Espénié, ton semblable par la_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =trimazi tié vadâzâξ di anizié banâ mirâξ Ramié di=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _force des “vadazas,” te envoie trois adieux. Ramié te_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =trinir tié toumaξ ti bé animinâ ni tiche di uzir nâmi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _parlera des charmes de sa existence et bientôt te dira beaucoup_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ti Espênié. évaï divinée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _de Espénié. Sois heureuse!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Ramié, dweller in Espénié, thy like, by the force of the “vadazas,”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, sends thee three adieux. Ramié will speak to thee of the charms of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, existence, and presently will tell thee much of Espénié. Be happy!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Graphic. October 27, 1898 (translated December 18).—“Ten minutes to one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the afternoon. No vision, but a severe cramp in the right arm and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a strong impulse to take pencil and paper. I write, I know not why.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(It is seen by the translation given two months later that the text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refers to the first manifestation of Ramié and is an announcement of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ultra-Martian vision which came a few days later.) See Fig. 28.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The term =vadazas=, which has never been explained, has not a Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance, and appears to have been borrowed from the Hindoo cycle. As
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to _Espénié_, see text No. 6.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  32. =anâ évaï maniké é bétiné mis tié attanâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Maintenant sois attentive à regarder un des mondes_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =kâ di médinié bétinié tès tapié ni bée atèv kavivé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _qui te entourent. Regarde ce “tapié” et ses êtres étranges._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =danda anâ=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Silence maintenant!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Now be attentive to behold one of the worlds which surround thee. Look
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, at that “tapié” and its strange beings. Silence now!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. November 2, 1898 (translated December 18).—Hélène has a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,morning vision of a Martian (Ramié) who encircles her waist with one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arm and with the other shows her, while speaking these words, a strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tableau (=tapié=) containing extraordinary beings speaking the unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language of the following text. At the moment the vision is effaced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène writes, without perceiving that she has done so, text No. 34.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(For further details, see the following chapter on the Ultra-Martian.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  33. BAK SANAK TOP ANOK SIK
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =sirima nêbé viniâ-ti-mis-métiche ivré toué=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _rameau vert nom de un homme sacré dans_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  ÉTIP VANÉ SANIM BATAM ISSEM TANAK
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =viniâ-ti-misé-bigâ azâni maprinié imizi kramâ ziné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _nom de une enfant mal entré sous panier bleu_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  VANEM SÉBIM MAZAK TATAK SAKAM
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =viniâ-ti-mis-zaki datrinié tuzé vâmé gâmié=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _nom de un animal caché malade triste pleure._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Branch green—name of a man—sacred—in—name of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, child—bad—entered—under—basket—blue—name of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, animal—hidden—ill—sad—weeps.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive, as to the non-Martian text (see following chapter) which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène heard spoken on the 2d of November by the strange beings of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tableau of the preceding vision. Vocal, as to the Martian translation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this text, which was given by Astané (incarnated in Hélène and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaking the unknown language by her mouth, followed by its Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equivalent for each word), in the seance of the 18th of December, 1898.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Immediately after, Astané yielded his place to Esenale, who in turn
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeated the Martian phrase, translating it word for word into French
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the customary process.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 29. Text No. 34 (November 2, 1898), written by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Mlle. Smith, incarnating Ramié. Natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *34. =Ramié di pédrinié anâ né ériné diviné=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Ramié te quitte maintenant, est satisfait, heureux_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =té mûné ten ti vi. hed dassinié mis abadâ ti ché=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _du moment près de toi. Il garde un peu de ton_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =atèv ni di parêzié banâ mirâξ.—évaï divinée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _être et te laisse trois adieux. Sois heureuse!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Ramié leaves thee now, is satisfied, happy for the moment near to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, thee. He retains a little of thy being and leaves thee three adieux.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Be happy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Graphic. November 2, 1898 (translated December 18).—Hélène only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceived after its accomplishment that her hand, which she felt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“firmly held,” had written this text at the close of the preceding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision (see Fig. 29).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  35. [A] =attanâ zabiné pi ten té iche tarvini mabûré=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Monde arriéré, très près du nôtre, langage grossier,_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =nubé téri zée atèv [B] Astané êzi dabé fouminé ni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _curieux comme les êtres!—Astané, mon maître puissant et_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ié ti takâ tubré né bibé ti zé umêzé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _tout de pouvoir, seul est capable de le faire._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Hidden world, very near to ours, coarse language, curious like the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, beings.—Astané, my powerful master and all powerful, alone is capable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of doing it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. December 5, 1898 (translated December 18).—Working by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lamp-light at seven o’clock in the morning, Hélène again had a vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the Martian (Ramié) who had clasped her waist with one arm while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,showing her something with a gesture of the other (probably the tableau
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the preceding vision, though Hélène did not see it) and uttering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first phrase of it (A). The second phrase (B) is the reply of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same Martian to a mental question of Hélène asking him to translate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the strange language of the other day. (She must, therefore, have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understood the meaning of the first phrase in order to have replied to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it by her appropriate mental question.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 30. Text No. 37 (March 24, 1899), written by Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Smith, incarnating Astané. [Collection of M. Lemaître.] Owing to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, defect of the stereotype plate a dot is lacking on the first letter.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  36. [A] =aé aé aé aé lassunié lâmi rêzé aé aé aé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Aé, aé, aé, aé!—Approche; voici Rêzé... aé, aé, aé,_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =aé niké bulié va né ozâmié zitêni primêni—[B] ozâmié=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _aé, petit Bulié... où est Ozamié? Zitêni, Primêni... Ozamié,_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =viniâ ti mis bigâ kêmâ zitêni viniâ ti misé bigâ kêmisi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _nom de un enfant mâle; Zitêni, nom de une enfant femelle;_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =primêni viniâ ti misé bigâ kêmisi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Priméni, nom de une enfant femelle._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Aé, aé, aé, aé! Approach, here is Rézá ... aé, aé, aé, aé, little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Bulié ... where is Ozamié? Zitêni, Primêni ... Ozamié, name of a male
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, child; Zitêni, name of a female child; Primêni, name of a female child.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 31. Text No. 38 (March 30, 1899), written by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Mlle. Smith copying a text of Ramié, who appeared to her in a visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, hallucination. [Collection of M. Lemaître.]]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. March 8, 1899 (translated June 4).—Hélène heard the phrase
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(A) during the vision of which the description follows. At the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation, as the sitters did not at once understand that the three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first words are proper names, Esenale adds the phrase (B) with its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French signification. “I was unable to go to sleep yesterday evening.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At half-past eleven everything around me was suddenly lighted up, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the vivid light permitted me to distinguish surrounding objects. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arose this morning with a very clear remembrance of that which I then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saw. A tableau was formed in that light, and I had more before me than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the interior of a Martian house—an immense square hall, around which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shelves were fastened, or rather little tables suspended and fastened
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the wall. Each of these tables contained a baby, but not at all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bundled up; all the movements of these little infants were free, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a simple linen cloth was thrown round the body. They might be said to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be lying on yellow moss. I could not say with what the tables were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,covered. Some men with strange beasts were circulating round the hall;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these beasts had large flat heads, almost without hair, and large, very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,soft eyes, like those of seals; their bodies, slightly hairy, resembled
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somewhat those of roes in our country, except for their large and flat
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tails; they had large udders, to which the men present fitted a square
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,instrument with a tube, which was offered to each infant, who was thus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fed with the milk of these beasts. I heard cries, a great hurly-burly,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and it was with difficulty that I could note these few words [of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,text]. This vision lasted about a quarter of an hour; then everything
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gradually disappeared, and in a minute after I was in a sound sleep.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *37. =Astané bounié zé buzi ti di triné nâmi ni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Astané cherche le moyen de te parler beaucoup et_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =ti di umêzé séïmiré bi tarvini=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _de te faire comprendre son langage._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Astané searches for the means to speak to thee much and to make thee
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, understand his language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Graphic. March 24, 1899 (translated June 4).—“Half-past six in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,morning. Vision of Astané. I was standing, about to put on my slippers.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He spoke to me, but I could not understand him. I took this sheet of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paper and a pencil; he spoke to me no more, but seized my hand which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,held the pencil. I wrote under this pressure; I understood nothing, for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this is as Hebrew to me. My hand was released; I raised my head to see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané, but he had disappeared” (see Fig. 30).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *38. =fédié amès Ramié di uzénir tès luné amès zé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Fédié, viens; Ramié te attendra ce jour; viens, le_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =boua trinir=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _frère parlera._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Fédié, come; Ramié will await thee to-day; come, the brother will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, speak.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Visual. March 30, 1899 (translated June 4).—Seated at her toilet-table,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at half-past nine o’clock in the evening, Hélène found herself suddenly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enveloped in a rose-colored fog, which hid one part of the furniture
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from her, then was dissipated, allowing her to see, at the farther end
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her room, “a strange hall, lighted with rose-colored globes fastened
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the wall.” Nearer to her appeared a table suspended in the air, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a man in Martian costume, who wrote with a kind of nail fastened to his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,right index-finger. “I lean towards this man; I wish to place my left
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand on this imaginary table, but my hand falls into empty space, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have great difficulty in restoring it to its normal position. It was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stiff, and for some moments felt very weak.” Happily the idea occurred
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her to take pencil and paper and copy “the characters which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian, whom I had seen several times before [Ramié], traced; and with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extreme difficulty—since they were much smaller than mine—I succeeded
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in reproducing them” (the Martian text of Fig. 31). All this lasted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about a quarter of an hour. I went immediately to bed, and saw nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more that evening, nor on the following day.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 32. Text No. 39 (April 1, 1899), written by Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Smith, incarnating Ramié. [Collection of M. Lemaître.] Natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  *39. =Ramié pondé acâmi andélir téri antéch=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Ramié, savant astronome, apparaîtra comme hier_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =iri é vi anâ. riz vi banâ mirâξ ti Ramié ni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _souvent à toi maintenant. Sur toi trois adieux de Ramié et_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =Astané. évaï divinée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Astané. Sois heureuse!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Ramié, learned astronomer, will appear as yesterday often to thee now.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Upon thee three adieux from Ramié and Astané. Be happy!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Graphic. April 1, 1899 (translated June 4).—“Again, on going to bed at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,five minutes past ten, a new vision of the personage seen day before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,yesterday [Ramié]. I thought he was about to speak, but no sound issued
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from his lips. I quickly take pencil and paper, and feel my right arm
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seized by him, and I begin to trace the strange handwriting attached
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hereto (see Fig. 32). He is very affectionate; his bearing, his look,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,everything breathes both goodness and strangeness. He leaves me really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,charmed.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  40. =ramié ébanâ dizênâ zivênié ni bi vraïni=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _Ramié, lentement, profondément, étudie, et son désir_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =assilé né ten ti rès kalâmé astané êzi dabé né zi=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _immense est près de se accomplir. Astané mon maître est là_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  =med lé godané ni ankôné évaï bané zizazi divinée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _pour me aider et réjouir. Sois trois fois heureuse!_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Ramié, slowly, deeply studies, and his great desire is near to being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, accomplished. Astané, my master, is there to aid me and to rejoice.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Mayst thou be thrice happy!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Auditive. June 4, 1899 (translated same seance).—Hemisomnambulism, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Hélène, without having a vision, hears a voice addressing words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her, from which, with some difficulty, she collected the preceding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentences.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,41. To these texts, forming sentences, in order to complete the whole,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some isolated words must be added, gathered on various occasions, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of which is obtained with sufficient certainty, either from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French context in which they were framed, or from Hélène’s description
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the objects which they designated. These words are =chèke=, _papier_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(“paper”); =chinit=, _bague_ (“ring”); =asnète=, _espèce de paravent_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(“kind of screen”). =Anini Nikaîné=, proper name of a little girl (see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,p. 176), probably the Martian sister of Esenale, who floats beside her,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,invisible to her, and watches over her during an illness, after the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fashion of spirit protectors. =Béniel=, proper name of our earth, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seen from Mars (which is called =Durée= in texts 7 and 9).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,III. REMARKS ON THE MARTIAN LANGUAGE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Provided the reader has given some attention to the foregoing texts, if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only to the two first, he undoubtedly will have been easily satisfied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to the pretended language of the planet Mars, and perhaps will be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,astonished that I have spent so much time upon it. But, as many of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_habitués_ of the seances of Mlle. Smith—and, naturally, Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself—hold seriously to its authenticity, I cannot absolve myself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from stating why the “Martian” is, in my opinion, only an infantile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,travesty of French. Even in default of the astronomical importance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which is claimed for it on the authority of Leopold, this idiom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preserves all the psychological interest which attaches to automatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,products of subconscious activities of the mind, and it well deserves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some minutes of examination.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is necessary at the start to render this justice to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian (I continue to designate it by that name, for the sake of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convenience)—namely, that it is, indeed, a language and not a simple
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,jargon or gibberish of vocal noises produced at the hazard of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moment without any stability. It cannot be denied the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characteristics—First: It is a harmony of clearly articulated sounds,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grouped so as to form words. Secondly: These words when pronounced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,express definite ideas. Thirdly, and finally: Connection of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words with the ideas is continuous; or, to put it differently, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signification of the Martian terms is permanent and is maintained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(apart from slight inconsistencies, to which I will return later on)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from one end to the other of the texts which have been collected in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,course of these three years.[21] I will add that in speaking fluently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and somewhat quickly, as Hélène sometimes does in somnambulism (texts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,4, 11, 15, etc.), it has an acoustic quality altogether its own, due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the predominance of certain sounds, and has a peculiar intonation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficult to describe. Just as one distinguishes by ear foreign
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,languages which one does not understand, the whole dialect possessing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a peculiar accent which causes it to be recognized, so in this case
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one perceives, from the first syllables uttered, whether Hélène is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaking Hindoo or Martian, according to the musical connection, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rhythm, the choice of consonants and vowels belonging to each of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two idioms. In this the Martian, indeed, bears the stamp of a natural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language. It is not the result of a purely intellectual calculation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but influences of an æsthetic order, emotional factors, have combined
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in its creation and instinctively directed the choice of its assonances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and favorite terminations. The Martian language has certainly not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been fabricated in cold blood during the normal, habitual, French (so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to speak) state of Mlle. Smith, but it bears in its characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tonalities the imprint of a peculiar emotional disposition, of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fixed humor or psychical Orientation, of a special condition of mind,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which may be called, in one word, the _Martian_ state of Hélène. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secondary personality, which takes pleasure in linguistic games, seems,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indeed, to be the same, at its source, as that which delights in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exotic and highly colored visual images of the planet of red rocks, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which animates the personages of the Martian romance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A glance at the _ensemble_ of the foregoing texts shows that Martian,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as compared with French, is characterized by a superabundance of _é_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_ê_, and _i’s_, and a scarcity of diphthongs and the nasal sounds. A
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more accurate statistical table of sounded vowels which strike the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ear in reading aloud the Martian texts on the one hand, and their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation into French on the other, gives me the percentages of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Table I., which follows. But it is well known that the vowels are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguished, from the acoustic point of view, by certain fixed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characteristic sounds, and that they are distributed at different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heights in the musical scale.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,TABLE I.—STATISTICS OF VOWEL SOUNDS
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                                             Martian  French
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _a_                                     %   16.3     13.7
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _e_ mute (like those of _casemate_)     “    3.6     20.8
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _e_ closed or half-closed (like those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,     of _hébété_, _rêvé_)                 “   36.9     14.3
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _e_ open (like that of _aloès_)         “    2.1      4.6
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _i_                                     “   34.3     13.4
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _o_                                     “    2.3      5.7
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _u_                                     “    2.3      3.1
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  Diphthongs and nasals (_ou_, _oi_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,      _eu_, _an_, _in_, _on_, _un_)       “    2.1     24.5
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,TABLE II.—GROUPING FROM POINT OF VIEW OF HEIGHT
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                                             Martian  French
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  Vowels, high (_i_ and _e_ sounded)      %   73.3     32.3
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  Vowels, middle (_a_ and _o_)            “   18.6     19.4
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  Vowels, low or hollow (_u_; diphthongs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,      and nasals; _e_ mute)               “    8.0     48.4
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_i_ and _é_ are the highest, _a_ and _o_ occupy the middle place,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_u_ and _ou_ are found in the lower part of the scale. In adding to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the latter, therefore, the nasals, which are always hollow, and also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_e_ mute, Table I. divides itself into the three groups of Table II.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the point of view of height and sonorousness. It is, therefore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clear that the Martian is of a general tonality much higher than the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French; since, while the two languages have almost the same proportion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of middle vowels, the low, hollow, or mute sounds, which constitute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,almost one-half of the French vowels, amount to scarcely one-twelfth in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian, in which the high sounds, on the contrary, represent in bulk
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three-quarters of the vowels, against one-third only in the French.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On the other hand, researches in the field of colored audition have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,demonstrated that a close psychological connection exists, based on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain emotional analogies and an equivalence of organic reactions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the high sounds and the bright or vivid colors, and the low
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or hollow sounds and the sombre colors. But this same correlation is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found in the somnambulistic life of Mlle. Smith, between the brilliant,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,luminous, highly colored visions which characterize her Martian cycle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the language of the high and sonorous vowels which gushes forth in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same cycle. It is allowable to conclude from this that it is really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same emotional atmosphere which bathes and envelops these varied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological products, the same personality which gives birth to these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visual and phonetic automatisms. The imagination cannot, however, as is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,easily understood, create its fiction out of nothing; it is obliged to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,borrow its materials from individual experience. The Martian tableaux
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are, therefore, only a reflection of the terrestrial world, but of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part of it which possesses the most warmth and brilliancy—the Orient;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the same way, the Martian language is only French metamorphosed and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,carried to a higher diapason.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I admit, then, that Martian is a language, and a natural language,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the sense that it is automatically brought forth in the emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state, or by the secondary personality, which is the source of all the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remainder of the cycle without the conscious participation of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith. It remains for me now to mention some of the characteristics
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which seem to indicate that the inventor of this subliminal linguistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,work had never known any idiom other than French, that it is much more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensible to verbal expression than to logical connection of ideas,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and that it possesses in an eminent degree that infantile and puerile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character which I have already pointed out in the author of the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,romance. It now becomes necessary to examine rapidly this unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language, from the point of view of its phonetics and its writing, its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grammatical form, its syntax, and its vocabulary.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. _Martian Phonetics and Handwriting._—Martian is composed of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulate sounds, all of which, consonants as well as vowels, exist in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French. While on this globe languages geographically our neighbors (not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to mention those farther away) differ each from the other by certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,special sounds—_ch_, German, _th_, English, etc.—the language of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,planet Mars does not permit of similar phonetic originalities. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seems, on the contrary, poorer in this respect than the French. As yet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have not found in it the hissing _j_ or _ge_ (as in _juger_), nor the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,double sound _x_. Martian phonetics, in a word, are only an incomplete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reproduction of French phonetics.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Martian alphabet, compared with ours, suggests a remarkable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,analogy. The graphic form of the characters is certainly novel, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,no one would divine our letters in these designs of exotic aspect.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nevertheless, each Martian sign (with the single exception of that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the plural) corresponds to a French sign, although the inverse is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the case, which indicates that here again we are in the presence of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feeble imitation of our system of handwriting.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The twelve written texts upon which I base my comparison comprise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about 300 words (of which 160 are different) and 1200 signs. There are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,altogether twenty-one different letters, all of which have their exact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equivalents in the French alphabet, which also has five others which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian lacks; _j_ and _x_, of which the sounds themselves have not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been observed, and _q_, _w_, and _y_, of which there is a double use,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with _k_, _v_, and _i_. This reduction of graphic material manifests
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself in two other details. First, there are neither accents nor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,punctuation marks, with the exception of a certain sign, resembling
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the French circumflex, used sometimes in the shape of a point at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,end of phrases. In the second place, each letter has only one form,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the diversity of capitals and small letters not seeming to exist in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian. Of ciphers we know nothing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are still three small peculiarities to notice:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. In default of capitals, the initials of proper names are often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguished by a point placed above the ordinary character.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. In the case of double letters the second is replaced by a point
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,situated at the right of the first.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. Finally, there exists, in order to designate the plural of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,substantives and of some adjectives, a special graphic sign, answering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to nothing in the pronunciation and having the form of a small
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vertical undulation, which reminds one a little of an amplification
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the French _s_, the usual mark of the plural in French. These
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiarities, outside the ordinary form of the letters, constitute the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sum total of ingenuity displayed in Martian handwriting.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It must be added that this handwriting, which is not ordinarily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inclined, goes from left to right, like the French. All the letters are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of nearly the same height, except that the _i_ is much smaller, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that they remain isolated from each other; their assembly into words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and phrases offers to the eye a certain aspect of Oriental hieroglyphic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inscriptions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Martian alphabet never having been revealed as such, we are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ignorant of the order in which the letters follow each other. It would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seem as though the letters had been invented by following the French
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,alphabet, at least in great part, if one may judge according to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,analogies of form of the Martian characters corresponding to certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,series of French letters: compare _a_ and _b_; _g_ and _h_; _s_ and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_t_; and also the succession _k_, _l_, _m_, _n_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is in the phonetic value of the letters—that is to say, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correspondence of the articulated sounds with the graphic signs—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the essentially French nature of the Martian may be seen. The only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,notable difference to be pointed out here between the two languages
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is the much greater simplicity of the Martian orthography, resulting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the employment of no useless letters. All are pronounced, even the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,final consonants, such as _s_, _n_, _z_, etc., which are generally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,silent in French. This gives the impression that the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting is moulded on the spoken language, and is only the notation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the articulated sounds of the latter by the most economical means.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In so far it realizes the type of a handwriting truly phonetic—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is to say, where each sign corresponds to a certain elementary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulation, constant and invariable, and vice versa. It is full, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, of equivocations, of exceptions, of irregularities,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which make one and the same letter to have very different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pronunciations, according to circumstances, and, reciprocally,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which causes the same sound to be written in different ways without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our being able to perceive any rational explanation for all these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ambiguities—were it not for the fact that the very same thing is to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found in French!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian is only disguised French. I will mention only the most curious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and striking coincidences, all the more striking from the fact that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,field from which I have collected them is very limited, being confined
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the dozen texts written and pronounced, which contain only 160
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,different words.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The simple vowels of the Martian alphabet correspond exactly to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,five French vowels, _a_, _e_, _i_, _o_, _u_, and have the same shades
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of pronunciation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Martian _c_ plays the triple part which it also fulfils in French.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The _s_ has the same capricious character as in our language. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generally hard, but between two vowels it becomes soft, like _z_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. _Grammatical Forms._—The _ensemble_ of the texts which we possess
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not as yet permit us to make a Martian grammar. Certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indications, however, warrant the prediction that the rules of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grammar, if it ever sees the light of day, will be only the counterpart
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of, or a parody upon, those of French.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here, for example, is a list of personal pronouns, articles, possessive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adjectives, etc., which have appeared hitherto:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _je_ =cé=      _me_ =lé=,    _ton_ =ché=    _ce_ =tès=,     _de_ =ti=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                  _moi_ =si=                    _ces_ =têsé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _tu_ =dé=      _te_ =di=,    _ta_ =chée=    _cette_ =tês=,  _des_ =tié=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                   _toi_ =vi=                   =têsée=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _il_ =hed=     _se_ =rès=,   _tes_ =chi=    _le_ (pron.)    _du_ =té=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                   _lui_ =pi=                  =zé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _nous_ =nini=  _mon_ =êzi=   _son_ =bi=     _qui_ =kâ=,     _au_ =ine=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                                                _que_ =ké=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _vous_ =sini=   _ma_ =êzé=   _sa_ =bé=      _quel_ =kiz=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                                                _quelle_ =kizé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _ils_ =hed=    _mes_ =éziné=   _ses_ =bée=   _un_ =mis=, _une_ =misé=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  _on_ =idé=     _notre_ =iche=                _le_, _la_ _les_ (art.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                                                =zé=, =zi=, =zée=.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are some texts where the feminine is derived from the masculine
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the addition of an _e_ mute, and the plural by the small,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unpronounced sign, which has all the appearance of being a reminiscence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of French _s_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Between these two languages there is another order of points
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of contact, of a more special interest, because it shows the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preponderating rôle which verbal images have often played in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,making of Martian to the prejudice of the intrinsic, logical nature
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the ideas. I should say that at all times the Martian translates
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the French word, allowing itself to be guided by auditive analogies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without regard to the real meaning, in such a way that we are surprised
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to discover in the idiom of the planet Mars the same peculiarities of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,homonyms as in French. It is also the case that two vocables identical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to pronunciation, but of entirely heterogeneous signification, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the preposition _à_ and the _a_ of the verb _avoir_, are rendered in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian by the same word, _é_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Other curious coincidences are to be noted. In French the conjunction
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_et_ only slightly differs, from the point of view of phonic images,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the verb _est_; in Martian also there is a great analogy, between
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=ni= and =né=, which translate these two words. Between the past
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,participle =nié= of the verb _to be_ and the conjunction =ni= there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is only the difference of an =_é_=, just as between their French
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equivalents =_été_= and =_et_=.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It must be admitted that all these coincidences would be very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extraordinary if they were purely fortuitous.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. _Construction and Syntax._—The order of the words is absolutely the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same in Martian as in French. This identity of construction of phrases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is pursued sometimes into the minutest details, such as the division
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or amputation of the negation _ne_ ... _pas_ (texts 15 and 17), and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also the introduction of a useless letter in Martian to correspond to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a French euphemistic _t_ (see text 15), =Kèvi bérimir m hed=, _quand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reviendra-t-il?_ (“when will he return?”)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If it is admitted hypothetically that the succession of words,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,such as is given us in these texts, is not the natural ordering of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian language, but an artificial arrangement, like that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,juxtalinear translations for the use of pupils, the very possibility
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of that correspondence absolutely word for word would remain an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extraordinary fact without a parallel, since there is not a single
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language that I know of in which each term of the French phrase is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always rendered by _one_ term, neither more nor less, of the foreign
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phrase. The hypothesis referred to is, moreover, inadmissible, since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian texts, of which Esenale gives the literal translation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were not previously arranged by him with that end in view; they are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the identical words which Mlle. Smith heard and noted in her visions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often weeks and months before Esenale repeats them for the purpose of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translating them, and which constitute the conversation, as such, taken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from life, of the Martian personages. We must conclude from this that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these in their elocution follow step by step and word by word the order
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the French language, which amounts almost to saying that they speak
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a French the sounds of which have simply been changed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,4. _Vocabulary._—From an etymological point of view, I have not been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to distinguish any rule of derivation, even partial, that would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,permit the suspicion that the Martian words had come from French words,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to some law. Apart from the entire first text, where it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficult to deny that the people of Mars have stolen French terms of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,politeness, at the same time distorting them, no clear resemblance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is to be seen between Martian words and the French equivalents; at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,most, there are traces of borrowing, like =merve=, _superbe_, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,might have been abridged from _merveille_ (text 25), and =vechi=, an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imitation of _voir_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Still less does the Martian lexicon betray the influence of other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,known languages (at least to my knowledge). A term which suggests such
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,similarity is hardly ever met with—_e.g._, =modé=, _mère_ (“mother”),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and =gudé= _bon_ (“good”), cause us to think of German or English
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words; =animina= (“existence”) is like _anima_; various forms of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verbs _être_ and _vivre_ (“to be” and “to live”), =êvé=, =évaï=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=essat=, recall the Latin _esse_ or the Hebrew _évé_, and that passage
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the Biblical story of the Creation where Eve is called the mother
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of all living beings. A linguist who happened to be at the same time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a savant and a humorist would doubtless succeed in lengthening this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,list of etymologies, after the mode of the eighteenth century. But,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_cui bono_? In that rarity of points of contact between the idioms of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our terrestrial sphere and the Martian glossary, an argument might be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found in favor of the extra-terrestrial origin of the latter, if, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, it did not seem to betray the influence of the French
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language from the fact that a notable proportion of its words reproduce
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a suspicious manner the same number of syllables or letters as their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French equivalents; note, for example, besides the terms of politeness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,already mentioned, the words =tarvine=, _langage_; =haudan=, _maison_;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=dodé=, _ceci_; =valini=, _visage_, etc., and the great majority of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little words, such as =cé=, _je_; =ké=, _que_; =ti=, _de_; =dé=, _tu_;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,With the exception of such examples as these, it must be acknowledged
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that there is no trace of parentage, filiation, of any resemblance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whatever between the Martian and French vocabularies, which forms a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,singular contrast to the close identity which we have established
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the two languages in the preceding paragraphs.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This apparent contradiction carries its explanation in itself, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives us the key to Martian. This fantastic idiom is evidently the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,naïve and somewhat puerile work of an infantile imagination, to which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occurred the idea of creating a new language, and which, while giving
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to its lucubrations certain strange and unknown appearances, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,doubt caused them to run in the accustomed moulds of the only real
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language of which it had cognizance. The Martian of Mlle. Smith, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other words, is the product of a brain or a personality which certainly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has taste and aptitude for linguistic exercises, but which never knew
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that French takes little heed of the logical connection of ideas,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and did not take the trouble to make innovations in the matter of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phonetics, of grammar, or of syntax.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The process of creation of Martian seems to have consisted in simply
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taking certain French phrases as such and replacing each word by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some other chosen at random. That is why, especially in the texts at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the beginning, the structure of French words is recognized under the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian. The author herself was undoubtedly struck by it, and from that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time exerted herself to complicate her lexicon, to render her words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more and more unrecognizable.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This research of originality—which, however, she has never extended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beyond the purely material part of the language, never having an idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that there might be other differences in languages—represents an effort
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of imagination with which she must be credited. Homage must also be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rendered to the labor of memorizing, which the making of a dictionary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has necessitated. She has sometimes, indeed, fallen into errors; the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stability of her vocabulary has not always been perfect. But, finally,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after the first hesitation and independently of some later confusions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it gives evidence of a praiseworthy terminological consistency, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which no doubt in time, and with some suggestive encouragement, would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,result in the elaboration of a very complete language—perhaps even of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several languages, as we may augur from text 33, to which we shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,return in the following chapter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,5. _Style._—It remains to investigate the style. If it is true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that “manners make the man”—that is to say, not the impersonal and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abstract understanding, but the concrete character, the individual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,temperament, the humor and emotional vibration—we ought to expect to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,find in the style of the Martian texts the same special stamp which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguishes the visions, the sound of the language, the handwriting,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the personages—in short, the entire romance, that is to say, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious mixture of Oriental exoticism and of childish puerility of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the secondary personality of Mlle. Smith, at work in this cycle,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seems to be composed. It is difficult to pronounce upon these matters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of vague æsthetic impression rather than of precise observation; but,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as well as I can judge, there seems to me to be in the phraseology of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the texts collected an indefinable something which corresponds well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the general character of the entire dream. As these words are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidently first thought in French—then travesties in Martian by a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,substitution of sounds, the choice of which, as has been seen, apropos
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the high tonality of this language, reflects the general emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disposition—it is, naturally, under their French aspect that we ought
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to consider them in judging of their actual style. Unfortunately, we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not know how far the translation given by Esenale is identical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the primitive original; certain details seem to hint that there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are divergences sometimes. However that may be, it is clearly to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceived that the literary form of the majority of the texts (taken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in French) is more akin to poetry than to prose. While no one of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them is in verse, properly speaking, the large number of hemistiches
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which are met with, the frequency of inversion, the choice of terms,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the abundance of exclamations and of broken phrases, betray a great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intensity of sentimental and poetic emotion. The same character is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found, with a strong shade of exotic and archaic originality, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,formulas of salutation and farewell (“be happy to-day,” “three adieux
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to thee,“ etc.), as well as in many expressions and terms of phrases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which rather recall the obscure and metaphorical parlance of the Orient
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than the dry precision of our language of to-day (”_il garde un peu de
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ton être; cet élément mystérieux, immense_,” etc.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If, now, it is recollected that everywhere in literary history poetry
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,precedes prose, imagination comes before reason, and the lyric style
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before the didactic, a conclusion according with that of the preceding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paragraphs is reached. Which is, that, by its figures and its style,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian language (or the French phrases which serve it for a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,skeleton) seems to bring to us the echo of a past age, the reflex of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,primitive state of mind, from which Mlle. Smith to-day finds herself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very far removed in her ordinary and normal states of mind.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,IV. MLLE. SMITH AND THE INVENTOR OF MARTIAN
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The preceding analysis of the Martian language furnishes its support
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the considerations which the content of the romance has already
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggested to us in regard to its author (p. 194). To imagine that by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,twisting the sounds of French words a new language capable of standing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,examination could actually be created, and to wish to make it pass for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of the planet Mars, would be the climax of silly fatuity or of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imbecility were it not simply a trait of naïve candor well worthy of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the happy age of childhood.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The whole Martian cycle brings us into the presence of an infantine
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality exuberant of imagination, sharing, as to their light,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,color, Oriental exoticism, the æsthetic tendencies of the actual normal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality of Mlle. Smith, but contrasting with it outside its puerile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character in two points to be noted.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: It takes a special pleasure in linguistic discussions and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fabrication of unknown idioms, while Hélène has neither taste nor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facility for the study of languages, which she cordially detests and in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she has never met with success.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: Notwithstanding this aversion, Hélène possesses a certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowledge, either actual or potential, of German—in which her parents
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caused her to take lessons for three years—whereas the author of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian evidently knows only French. It is, in fact, difficult to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe that, if that author had only a very slight knowledge of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,German language (so different from the French by the construction
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of its sentences, pronunciation, its three genders, etc.), that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some reminiscences of it, at least, would not have slipped into its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lucubrations. I infer from this that the Martian secondary personality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which gives evidence of a linguistic activity so fecund, but so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,completely subject to the structural forms of the mother-tongue,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,represents a former stage, ulterior to the epoch at which Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,commenced the study of German.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If one reflects, on the other hand, on the great facility which Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith’s father seems to have possessed for languages (see p. 17),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the question naturally arises whether in the Martian we are not in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the presence of an awakening and momentary display of an hereditary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculty, dormant under the normal personality of Hélène, but which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has not profited from in an effective manner. It is a fact of common
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observation that talents and aptitudes often skip a generation and seem
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to pass directly from the grandparents to the grandchildren, forgetting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the intermediate link. Who knows whether Mlle. Smith, some day, having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtained Leopold’s consent to her marriage, may not cause the polyglot
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aptitudes of her father to bloom again with greater brilliancy, for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,glory of science, in a brilliant line of philologists and linguists of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,genius?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Meanwhile, and without even invoking a special latent talent in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s case, the Martian may be attributed to a survival or a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reawakening under the lash of mediumistic hypnoses of that general
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,function, common to all human beings, which is at the root of language
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and manifests itself with the more spontaneity and vigor as we mount
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,higher towards the birth of peoples and individuals.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Ontogenesis, say the biologists, reproduces in abridged form and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_grosso-modo_ phylogenesis; each being passes through stages analogous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to those through which the race itself passes; and it is known that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first ages of ontogenic evolution—the embryonic period, infancy,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,early youth—are more favorable than later periods and adult age to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ephemeral reappearances of ancestral tendencies, which would hardly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,leave any trace upon a being who had already acquired his organic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,development. The “poet who died young” in each one of us is only the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,most common example of those atavic returns of tendencies and of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotions which accompanied the beginnings of humanity, and remain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the appanage of infant peoples, and which cause a fount of variable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,energy in each individual in the spring-time of his life, to congeal or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disappear sooner or later with the majority; all children are poets,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and that in the original, the most extended, acceptation of the term.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They create, they imagine, they construct—and language is not the least
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of their creations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I conclude from the foregoing that the very fact of the reappearance of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that activity in the Martian states of Hélène is a new indication of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the infantile, primitive nature left behind in some way and long since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passed by her ordinary personality, of the subliminal strata which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumistic autohypnotization with her puts in ebullition and causes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to mount to the surface. There is also a perfect accord between the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,puerile character of the Martian romance, the poetic and archaic charms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of its style, and the audacious and naïve fabrication of its unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER VII
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,           THE MARTIAN CYCLE (CONCLUDED).—THE ULTRA-MARTIAN
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All things become wearisome at last, and the planet Mars is no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exception to the rule. The subliminal imagination of Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,however, will probably never tire of its lofty flights in the society
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Astané, Esenale, and their associates. I myself, I am ashamed to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,acknowledge, began, in 1898, to have enough of the Martian romance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Once having satisfied myself as to the essential nature of the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language, I did not desire to make a profound study of it, and since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the texts had made their appearance so slowly, for two years, as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,threaten to continue during the remainder of my natural existence,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as well as that of the medium, without coming to an end; finding, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, that the texts, considered as simple psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curiosities, varied but little and were at length likely to become
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,burdensome, I decided to try some experiment which, without drying up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their source, might at least break through this monotony. Up to that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time, without giving a positive opinion as to the Martian, I had always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manifested a very real interest in these communications, as well as in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith in her waking state, and in Leopold in his incarnations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Both of these showed themselves fully persuaded of the objective verity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this language, and of the visions which accompanied it. Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had not ceased, from the first day, to affirm its strictly Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,authenticity. Hélène, without maintaining absolutely that it came from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mars rather than from any other planet, shared the same faith in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extra-terrestrial origin of these messages; and, as appeared from many
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,details of her conversations and conduct, she saw in it a revelation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the loftiest import, which might some day cause “all the discoveries
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of M. Flammarion” to sink into insignificance. What would happen if I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,made up my mind to strike this strange conviction a telling blow, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,demonstrate that the pretended Martian was only a chimera, a product,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pure and simple, of somnambulistic autosuggestion?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,My first tentative experiment, addressed to Leopold, had no appreciable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,influence on the course of the Martian cycle. It was at the seance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of February 13, 1898. Hélène was profoundly asleep, and Leopold was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conversing with us by gestures of the arm and spelling on the fingers.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I categorically informed him of my certainty that the Martian was of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,terrestrial fabrication, and that a comparison with the French proved
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it so to be. As Leopold responded by emphatic gestures of dissent,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I detailed to him some evidences, among others the accord of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two languages as to their pronunciation of _ch_, as to the homonym
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the pronoun and article _le_. He listened to me, and seemed to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understand my arguments, but he refused to admit the force of these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characteristic coincidences, and said: “There are some things more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extraordinary,” and was unwilling to give up the authenticity of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian. We stood by our respective opinions, and the later texts do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not show any trace of our interview. It seemed, therefore, that it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not through the intervention of Leopold that a modification of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian romance was to be suggested.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I allowed some months to pass, then tried a discussion with Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while she was awake. On two occasions, in October, 1898, I expressed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her my utter skepticism as to the Martian. The first time, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,6th of October, in a visit which I made to her outside of any seance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I confined myself to certain general objections to it, to which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,replied, in substance, as follows: First, that this unknown language,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by reason of its intimate union with the visions, and in spite of its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possible resemblances to the French, must necessarily be Martian, if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the visions are. Then nothing seriously opposes that actual origin of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the visions, and, consequently, of the language itself; since there are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two methods of explaining this knowledge of a far-off world—namely,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communications properly _spiritistic_ (_i. e._, from spirits to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirits, without material intermediary) the reality of which cannot be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,held to be doubtful; _and clairvoyance_, that faculty, or undeniable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sixth sense, of mediums which permits them both to see and hear at any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distance. Finally, that she did not hold tenaciously to the distinctly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian origin of that strange dream, provided it is conceded that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comes from somewhere outside herself, it being inadmissible to regard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it as the work of her subconsciousness, since she had not, during her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary life, absolutely any perception whatever, any sentiment, not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the shadow of a hint of that alleged interior work of elaboration to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which I persisted in attributing it against all the evidence and all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,common-sense.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Some days later (October 16th), as Mlle. Smith, perfectly awake after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an afternoon seance, passed the evening at my house, and seemed to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the fulness of her normal state, I returned to the charge with more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of insistence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I had until then always avoided showing her the full translation of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian texts, as well as the alphabet, and she only knew by sight, so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to speak, the Martian handwriting, and was ignorant of the value of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This time I explained to her in detail the secrets of the language,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its superficial originalities and fundamental resemblances to French;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the frequent occurrence of _i_ and _e_, its puerile construction,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,identical with French, even to the slipping in of a superfluous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,euphonic =m= between the words =bérmier= and =hed= in order to imitate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the expression _reviendra-t-il?_ its numerous caprices of phonetics
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and homonyms, evident reflexes of those to which we are accustomed,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. I added that the visions seemed to me to be also suspicious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,through their improbable analogies with that which we see on our globe.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Supposing that the houses, the vegetation, and the people of Mars
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were constructed on the same fundamental plan as those here below, it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was nevertheless very doubtful whether they had the same proportions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and typical aspect; in short, astronomy teaches us that on Mars the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,physical conditions—the length of the year, the intensity of weight,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc.—are all other than with us: the last point, in particular, should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,act on all the products, natural and artificial, in such a way as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,alter greatly the dimensions as well as the proportions of height
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and size which are familiar to us. I observed, again, that there are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,doubtless on Mars, as on the earth, a great variety of idioms, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the singular chance which made Esenale speak a language so similar to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French was very astonishing. I concluded, finally, by remarking that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all this was easily explicable, as well as the Oriental aspect of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Martian landscapes and the generally infantile character of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,romance, if it were regarded as a work of pure imagination, due to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secondary personality or to a dream state of Mlle. Smith herself, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recognized having always had “great taste for that which is original
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and connected with the Orient.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For more than an hour Hélène followed my demonstration with a lively
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interest. But to each new reason, after having appeared at first a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little disconcerted by it, she did not hesitate to repeat, like a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,triumphal refrain and as an unanswerable argument, that science is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not infallible; that no scientist has yet been on Mars; and that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consequently it is impossible to affirm with any certainty that affairs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there are not conformable to her visions. To my conclusion she replied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that, as far as concerns Mars or anything else, her revelations did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not, in any case, spring from sources within herself, and that she did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not understand why I was so implacable against that which is the most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simple supposition, that of their authenticity, or why I should prefer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to it this silly and absurd hypothesis of an underlying self plotting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her, unknown to her, this strange mystification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Maintaining all the while that my deductions appeared to me strictly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correct, I felt bound to admit that science is not infallible, and that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a voyage to Mars could alone solve all our doubts as to what takes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,place there. We parted good friends, but that conversation left me with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a very clear impression of the complete uselessness of my efforts to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,make Mlle. Smith share my conceptions of the subliminal consciousness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But this, however, neither surprises nor grieves me, since from her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point of view it is perhaps better that she thus believes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following shows, however, that my reasonings on that evening,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sterile in appearance, were not without effect. If they have not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,modified Mlle. Smith’s _conscious_ manner of seeing, and, above
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all, the opinion of Leopold, they have nevertheless penetrated to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the profound strata where the Martian visions are elaborated, and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,acting there as a leaven, have been the source of new and unexpected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,developments. This result brilliantly corroborates the idea that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole Martian cycle is only a product of suggestion and autosuggestion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Just as formerly the regret of M. Lemaître at not knowing that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which passes on other planets had furnished the first germ of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lucubration, so now my criticisms and remarks on the language and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peoples of that upper world served as a point of departure for new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circuits of Hélène’s subliminal imagination. If, in fact, the content
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of our discussion of the 16th of October, which I have above briefly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,summed up, is compared with the visions of the following months (see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning with text 30), it is clear that these latter contain an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evident beginning of an answer, and are an attempt to satisfy the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questions which I raised. A very curious attempt is there made, naïve
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and infantine, like the whole Martian romance, to escape the defects of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which I complained on that occasion, not by modifying and correcting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it—that would have been to reverse and to contradict herself—but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by going beyond it in some sort, and by superposing upon it a new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,construction, an _ultra-Martian_ cycle, if I may be permitted that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,expression, hinting at the same time that it unfolds itself on some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,undetermined planet still farther away than Mars, and that it does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constitute an absolutely independent narrative, but that it is grafted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the primitive Martian romance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The suggestive effect of my objections of the 16th of October was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not immediate, but became a work of incubation. Text 30, coming the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following week, differed but slightly from the preceding, save for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absence of a euphonic letter, which, however, had been better in place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the words =bindié idé=, _trouve-t-on_, than in the =bèrimir m
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hed= of text 15, to which I had attracted Hélène’s attention; possibly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is allowable to regard this little detail as a first result of my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,criticisms. The apparition, a little later, of a new Martian personage,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Ramié, who promised Hélène some near revelations as to a planet not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,otherwise specified (text 31), proves that the ultra-Martian dream
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was in process of subconscious ripening, but it did not burst forth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,until the 2d of November (seventeen days after the suggestion with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which I connect it), in that curious scene in which Ramié reveals to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith an unsuspected and grotesque world, the language of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,singularly differs from the usual Martian. The detailed description
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of that strange vision, which Hélène sent me, is worth the trouble of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,citing (see also texts 32 to 35):
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I was awakened, and arose about twenty minutes ago. It was about a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quarter-past six in the morning, and I was getting ready to sew. Then,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for an instant, I noticed that my lamp was going out, and I ended by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not seeing anything more. At the same moment I felt my waist clasped,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strongly held by an invisible arm. I then saw myself surrounded by a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rose-colored light, which generally shows itself when a Martian vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is coming. I quickly took paper and pencil, which are always within
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reach on my toilet-table, and placed these two things on my knees, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,case some words should come to be noted.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Hardly were these preparations concluded when I saw at my side a man
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Martian visage and costume. It was, in fact, the personage [Ramié]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who had clasped my waist with his left arm, showing me with his right
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand a tableau, at first indistinct, but which finally outlined itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quite clearly. He spoke also some sentences, which I can note very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well, it seems to me [text 32, where Ramié attracts the attention
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène to one of the worlds which surround him and makes her see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange beings.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I saw then a section of country peopled by men altogether different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from those which inhabit our globe. The tallest of all were three feet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,high, and the majority were an inch or two shorter. Their hands were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immense, about ten inches long by eight broad; they were ornamented
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with very long black nails. Their feet also were of great size.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I did not see any tree, any bit of verdure. I saw a medley of houses,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or rather cabins, of the most simple style, all low, long, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,windows or doors; and each house had a little tunnel, about ten feet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long [see Fig. 33] running from it into the earth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 33. Ultra-Martian houses. Drawn by Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, after her vision of November 2, 1898.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“The roofs were flat, supplied with chimneys, or tubes. The men,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with arms and bodies bare, had for all clothing only a sort of skirt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reaching to the waist and supported by a kind of suspenders thrown over
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the shoulders, which were apparently very strong. Their heads were very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,short, being about three inches high by six inches broad, and were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,close shaven. They had very small eyes, immense mouths, noses like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beans. Everything was so different from what we are accustomed to in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our world that I should have almost believed it to be an animal rather
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than a man I saw there, had there not suddenly issued from the lips of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one of them some words, which, fortunately—I hardly know how—I was able
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to note down. This vision lasted a quarter of an hour. Then I found my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waist liberated, but my right hand was still firmly held, in order to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trace strange characters on the paper” (text 34, adieux of Ramié to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A little later there was a continuation, or an abortive repetition, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same vision; the table did not appear distinctly, and Ramié (text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,35) contented himself with teaching Hélène things concerning a world
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beyond, a near neighbor to Mars, and a coarser language, of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané alone could furnish a translation. This is, in effect, what took
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,place two weeks later: Astané incarnated himself with gestures and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiar spasmodic movements, and repeated (in Hélène’s ordinary voice)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the barbaric text, followed word by word by its Martian equivalents,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Esenale, in turn, succeeding Astané, interpreted in French, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his customary manner. Leopold also informed us, in reply to a question
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of one of the sitters, that this uncouth and primitive world was one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the smaller planets; but it is to be presumed that he would also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have answered in the affirmative if he had been asked if it were called
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Phobos or Deimos; and, in short, one of the satellites of Mars would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,answer better than the asteroids to the globe “very near to ours,” of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which Ramié spoke.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Up to this point the ultra-Martian messages were confined to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preceding. The last texts obtained (37 to 40) seem to announce that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the end has not been reached on that side, and cause us to hope for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,new revelations, when the astronomer Ramié, as the result of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having studied under the skilful direction of his master Astané, shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be in a position to make further discoveries in the Martian sky.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Psychologically speaking, this amounts to saying that the process of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latent incubation continues; a new ultra-Martian language is in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of development in the subliminal depths. If it bursts forth some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,day, I shall hasten to bring it to the knowledge of the scientific
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world—in another edition of this book. For the present I limit myself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to remarking how much the little ultra-Martian we possess already
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicates the wish to answer my questions of the 16th of October.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I had accused the Martian dream of being a mere imitation, varnished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with brilliant Oriental colors, of the civilized environment which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surrounds us—and here is a world of terrifying grotesqueness, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,black soil, from which all vegetation is banished, and the coarser
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,people of which are more like beasts than human beings. I had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,insinuated that the people and things of that upper world ought really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to have other dimensions and proportions than with us—and here are the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inhabitants of that farther world veritable dwarfs, with heads twice as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,broad as they are high, and houses to match. I had made allusion to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probable existence of other languages, referred to the superabundance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in Martian of _i_ and _e_, impeached its syntax and its _ch_, borrowed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the French, etc.—and here is a language absolutely new, of a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,peculiar rhythm, extremely rich in _a_, without any _ch_ at all up to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the present moment, and of which the construction is so different from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the French that there is no method of discovering it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This latter point, above all, seems to me to present in its apogee the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,character of childishness and puerility which clearly shows itself in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that unexpected appendix to the Martian cycle, as in the entire cycle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself. Evidently the naïve subliminal philologist of Mlle. Smith has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been struck by my criticisms on the identical order of the words in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian and in French, and has endeavored to avoid that defect in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,new effort at an unknown language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But not knowing in just what syntax and construction consist, she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found nothing better to suit her purpose than the substitution of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chaos for the natural arrangement of the terms in her thought, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fabrication of an idiom which had decidedly nothing in common with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French in this respect. Here is where the most beautiful disorder is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,practically a work of art. It has, moreover, succeeded, since, even
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the double translation, Martian and French, of text 33, it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossible to know exactly what is meant.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is possibly the little girl _Etip_ who is sad, and who _weeps_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,because the man _Top_ has done _harm_ to the _sacred_ animal _Vanem_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(which had _hidden_, _sick_, _under_ some _green branches_), wishing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to _enter in_ to a _blue basket_. At least it could not have been the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_branch_, the _man_, or the _basket_ which was _sacred_, the child
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sick, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The green branch is out of harmony with a world in which, according to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s vision, there were neither trees nor verdure; but Esenale
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has not specified whether it means _vert_ or _ver_, _vers_, etc., nor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whether _caché_ and _entré_ are participles or infinitives. I leave
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this rebus to the reader and come to my conclusion, which will be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brief, since it accords with the considerations already given at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,end of the two preceding chapters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The whole Martian cycle, with its special language and its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ultra-Martian appendix, is only, at bottom, a vast product of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasional suggestions on the part of the environment, and of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,autosuggestions which have germinated, sprouted, and borne abundant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fruit, under the influence of incitement from the outside, but without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming to amount to anything but a shapeless and confused mass, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imposes on one by its extent much more than its intrinsic worth, since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is supremely childish, puerile, insignificant in all aspects,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,save as a psychological curiosity. The author of this lucubration is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not the real adult and normal personality of Mlle. Smith, who has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very different characteristics, and who feels herself, in the face
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these automatic messages, as though in the presence of something
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,foreign, independent, exterior, and finds herself constrained to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe in their objective reality and in their authenticity. It seems,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indeed, rather a former, infantine, less evolved state of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individuality, which has again come to light, renewed its life, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,once more become active in her Martian somnambulisms.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is hardly necessary to add, in conclusion, that the whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritistic or occult hypothesis seems to me to be absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,superfluous and unjustified in the case of the Martian of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Autosuggestibility set in motion by certain stimulating influences
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the environment, as we come to see through the history of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ultra-Martian, amply suffices to account for this entire cycle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                             CHAPTER VIII
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                           THE HINDOO CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While the Martian romance is purely a work of fantasy, in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,creative imagination was able to allow itself free play through
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having no investigation to fear, the Hindoo cycle, and that of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette, having a fixed terrestrial setting, represent a labor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of construction which was subjected from the start to very complex
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conditions of environments and epochs. To keep within the bounds of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probability, not to be guilty of too many anachronisms, to satisfy the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,multiple demands of both logic and æsthetics, formed a particularly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dangerous undertaking, and one apparently altogether beyond the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,powers of a person without special instruction in such matters. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subconscious genius of Mlle. Smith has acquitted itself of the task
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a remarkable manner, and has displayed in it a truly wonderful and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,delicate sense of historic possibilities and of local color.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Hindoo romance, in particular, remains for those who have taken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part in it a psychological enigma, not yet solved in a satisfactory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manner, because it reveals and implies in regard to Hélène, a knowledge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relative to the costumes and languages of the Orient, the actual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,source of which it has up to the present time not been possible to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discover. All the witnesses of Mlle. Smith’s Hindoo somnambulisms who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are of the same opinion on that subject (several refrain from having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any) unite in seeing in it a curious phenomenon of cryptomnesia,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of reappearances of memories profoundly buried beneath the normal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waking state, together with an indeterminate amount of imaginative
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exaggeration upon the canvas of actual facts. But by this name of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cryptomnesia, or resurrection of latent memories, two singularly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,different things are understood. For me it is only a question of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories of her present life; and I see nothing of the supernormal in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that. For while I have not yet succeeded in finding the key to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enigma, I do not doubt its existence, and I will mention later certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indications which seem to me to support my idea that the Asiatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,notions of Mlle. Smith have a wholly natural origin.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For the observer inclined towards spiritism, on the contrary, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sleeping memory which is awakened in somnambulism is nothing less
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than that of a previous existence of Mlle. Smith, and that piquant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explanation, which was first given by Leopold, profits in their eyes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the impossibility which I find in proving that it is anything else.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Doubtless, if one was familiar with all the incidents of Hélène’s life
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from her earliest childhood, and if it were absolutely certain that her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowledge of India had not been furnished her from the outside, through
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the normal channel of the organs of sense, it would be necessary to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seek elsewhere for the solution of the riddle, and to choose between
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the hypothesis of an atavic memory, hereditarily transmitted across
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fifteen generations, and actual telepathic communication with the brain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of some Indian savant, or a spiritistic reincarnation. But we do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,find ourselves in that position. There is nothing less known, in its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,details, than the daily life of Mlle. Smith in her childhood and youth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But, when all the feats of which the subconscious memory of our present
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life is capable are considered, it is not scientifically correct to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have recourse to a pretended “anteriority,” of which the only guarantee
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is the authority of Leopold, in order to explain the somnambulistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparitions of facts of which Mlle. Smith in her waking state has no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remembrance, I admit, but the origin of which may well have been hidden
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the unknown recesses of her past life (reading, conversation, etc.).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The plot of the Hindoo romance, which I have already briefly hinted at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on divers occasions, is as follows:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène Smith was, at the end of the fourteenth century of our era,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the daughter of an Arab sheik, possibly named Pirux, whom she left
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in order to become, under the name of Simandini, the eleventh wife
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Prince Sivrouka Nayaka, of whom I have the honor to be the actual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reincarnation. (I pray the reader once for all to pardon me the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immodest rôle which has been imposed upon me in this affair against my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This Sivrouka, who reigned over Kanara, and built there, in 1401,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the fortress of Tchandraguiri, does not seem to have been a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accommodating person; although not bad at heart, and quite attached to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his favorite wife, he had a wild humor and very uncouth manners. More
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could not be expected of an Asiatic potentate of that epoch. Simandini,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nevertheless, passionately loved him, and at his death she was burned
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,alive on his grave, after the fashion of Malabar.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Around these two principal personages are grouped some secondary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,figures, among others a faithful domestic named Adèl, and a little
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,monkey, Mitidja, which Simandini had brought to India with her from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Arabia; then the fakir Kanga, who occupies a much more important place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the Martian romance, in which we have seen him reincarnated as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Astané, than in the Hindoo cycle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Some other individuals, all masculine—Mougia, Miousa, Kangia,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Kana—appear in obscure rôles, concerning which nothing certain can be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,said.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The hypnoid states, in which this romance has manifested itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with Hélène, present the greatest variety and all degrees, from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perfect waking state (apparently), momentarily crossed by some visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or auditive hallucination, the memory of which is preserved intact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and allows a detailed description, up to total somnambulism, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,amnesia upon awakening, in which the most striking scenes of ecstasies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or incarnations are unfolded. We shall see divers examples in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following pages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I. APPARITION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORIENTAL CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Without recurring to the strange and little-known visions which already
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,haunted the childhood and youth of Mlle. Smith (see pp. 20-25), I will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,retrace the principal stages of her Asiatic romance from the birth of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her mediumship.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,During the three first years there were but few manifestations of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sort, in the seances, at least, while as to the automatisms which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,developed at other times, especially at night, or in the hypnagogic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state, we know nothing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In November, 1892, two seances of the N. group are occupied with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparition of a Chinese city—Pekin, according to the table—in which a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnate spirit, a parent of one of the group, is found performing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a mission to a sick child.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In her seances of 1894, Hélène had on several occasions detached
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions belonging to the Orient, as appeared from their content, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hints dictated by the table. She also saw Teheran; then the cemetery
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the missions at Tokat (June 12th); a cavalier with a white woollen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cloak and a turban bearing the name of Abderrhaman (September 2d); and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finally, an Oriental landscape, which depicted a ceremony of Buddhist
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aspect (October 16th). This latter vision, more especially, seemed to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be a forerunner of the Hindoo romance, since the records of the seances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of that period show an _ensemble_ of characteristic traits which will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be again met with in the later Hindoo scenes—_e.g._, an immense garden
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of exotic plants, colonnades, rows of palm-trees, with enormous stone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lions at the head; rugs of magnificent design, a temple surrounded by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trees, with a statue, apparently that of Buddha; a procession of twelve
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,women in white, who kneel, holding lighted lamps; in the centre another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,woman, with very black hair, detaches herself from the procession,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,balances a lamp, and burns a powder which expands into a white stone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(the continuation of the romance shows this woman to be Simandini, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whom this was the first appearance).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,February 17, 1895.—At the end of a rather long seance, the table
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dictates _Pirux sheik_, and replies to our questions that it refers to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an Arab sheik of the fifteenth century. At this moment Hélène awakes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saying that she had seen a man with a black mustache and curly hair,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wearing a cloak and a turban, who seemed to be laughing at and mocking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her. The spelling out of Pirux was not very clear, and Leopold, when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interrogated later, neither affirmed categorically, nor did he deny,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that this name was that of the sheik, father of Simandini.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,March 3.—Seance with six persons present, all having their hands upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table. After a brief waiting, Hélène is surprised at no longer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being able to see my left middle finger, while she can see all my other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fingers quite clearly. My bunch of keys, which I then place upon my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,middle finger, likewise disappears from her view. This very limited,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,systematic, visual anæsthesia authorizes the prediction, following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,numerous examples of former seances, that the phenomena about to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appear will concern me. Presently begins a long vision, consisting of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scenes which Hélène believes she has already partially seen before.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She describes a pagoda, which she draws with her left hand, with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,few strokes of her pencil; then an avenue of palms and statues, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,procession, and ceremonies before an altar, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The principal rôles are played by a personage in sandals, a great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,yellow robe, a helmet of gold, ornamented with precious stones (first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance of Sivrouka) and by the woman with black hair and white
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,robe, already seen on the 12th of October (Simandini).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the first part of the vision, Hélène, who follows that woman with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ecstatic gaze, describing her to us, sees her coming towards me, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at that moment the invisibility of my finger was extended to my entire
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,person, and Hélène neither sees nor hears me. While she was fully
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conscious of the other sitters, she was astonished at seeing this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,woman make “on the empty air” certain gestures of laying-on of hands
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and benediction, which were made upon my head. On several occasions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I change my place, and seat myself in different parts of the room.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Each time, after a few seconds, Hélène turns towards me, and, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceiving me, sees the woman with black hair place herself behind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my seat and repeat her gestures of benediction in space, at a height
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corresponding to that of my head.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As the vision continues, I do not play any further rôle, but it has to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do with a ceremony during which the Hindoo woman with a diadem on her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,head burns incense in the midst of her twelve companions, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,During all this time the table, contrary to its custom, gave no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explanation; but Hélène, having herself asked some questions, remarks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the imaginary woman replies to her by certain signs of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,head and reveals to her many things that she had known in a former
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existence. At the moment of the disappearance of the vision, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had lasted more than an hour, Mlle. Smith hears the words (“Until
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presently”). The continuation, in fact, was not long delayed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,March 6.—Repetition and continuation of the preceding seance, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this degree of progress—viz., that the visual hallucination of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,woman with the black hair was changed into a total cœnæsthetic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucination—_i.e._, instead of a simple vision an incarnation was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,produced. After a very impressive scene of benediction, Hélène gave
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself up to a succession of pantomimes in which she seemed to take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part in a fearful spectacle and to struggle with enemies (scene of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the funeral pile). She ended by seating herself on the divan when she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovered her normal state, after a series of psychical oscillations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,various attitudes, etc. The last of her phases of mimicry was to tear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,off and throw away all the ornaments which an Asiatic princess could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wear—rings on all her fingers, bracelets on her arms and wrists, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,necklace, diadem, ear-rings, girdle, anklets. Once awake, she had no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollection of the scene of benediction, but recalled quite distinctly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the dreams corresponding to the other pantomimes. She saw again the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,black-haired woman, the Oriental landscape of the preceding seance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. In the course of her description the passage of the simple vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into the scene of incarnation was reflected in a change of the form
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her narrative; she spoke to us of the woman in the third person,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then suddenly adopted the first person, and said “I” in recounting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,among other things that she—or the black-haired woman—saw a corpse on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the funeral pile, upon which four men, against whom she struggled,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,endeavored to force her to mount. When I drew her attention to this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,change of style, she replied that, in fact, it seemed as though she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself was that woman.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Independently of the Hindoo romance, these two seances are interesting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from a psychological point of view, because the change from a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visual, objective hallucination into total cœnæsthetic and motor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucination occurs in it, constituting a complete transformation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the personality. This generalization of partial automatism at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning, this subjugation and absorption of the ordinary personality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the subliminal personality, does not always produce amnesia with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, that unique impression which she might describe on awakening as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being herself and some one else at the same time. (Compare, p. 119.)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It must be noted that in the particular case of the identification
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the black-haired Hindoo woman with Mlle. Hélène Smith of Geneva,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the problem of the causal connection is susceptible of two opposite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,solutions (and the same remark will be equally appropriate in the case
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Marie Antoinette).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For the believing spiritist it is because Mlle. Smith is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reincarnation of Simandini—that is to say, because these two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages, in spite of the separation of their existences in time and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,space, are substantially and metaphysically identical—that she really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again becomes Simandini, and feels herself to be a Hindoo princess in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain favorable somnambulistic states. For the empirical psychologist
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is, on the contrary, because the visual memory of a Hindoo woman
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(her origin is of no importance) grows like a parasite and increases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in surface and in depth like a drop of oil, until it invades the whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impressionable and suggestible personality of the medium—this is why
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith feels herself becoming this woman, and concludes from it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that she formerly actually was that person (see p. 28-30). But we must
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,return from this digression to the Hindoo dream.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,March 10.—After various waking visions relating to other subjects,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène enters into somnambulism. For twenty minutes she remains seated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with her hands on the table, by means of raps struck upon which Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,informs us that a scene of previous existence concerning me is being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prepared; that I was formerly a Hindoo prince, and that Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,long before her existence as Marie Antoinette, had then been my wife,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and had been burned on my tomb; that we should ultimately know the name
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this Hindoo prince, as well as the time and place of these events,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but not this evening, nor at the next seance. Then Hélène leaves the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table, and in a silent pantomime of an hour’s duration, the meaning of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which, already quite clear, is confirmed by Leopold, she plays, this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time to the very close, the scene of the funeral pile as outlined in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the preceding seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She goes slowly around the room, as if resisting and carried away in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spite of herself, by turns supplicating and struggling fiercely with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these fictitious men who are bearing her to her death.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All at once, standing on tiptoe, she seems to ascend the pile, hides,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with affright, her face in her hands, recoils in terror, then advances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anew as though pushed from behind. Finally she falls on her knees
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before a soft couch, in which she buries her face covered by her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clasped hands. She sobs violently. By means of her little finger,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visible between her cheek and the cushion of the couch, Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,continues to reply very clearly by yes and no to my questions. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the moment at which she again passes through her agony on the funeral
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pile: her cries cease little by little; her respiration becomes more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and more panting, then suddenly stops and remains suspended during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some seconds which seem interminable. It is the end! Her pulse is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fortunately strong, though a little irregular. While I am feeling it,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her breathing is re-established by means of a deep inspiration. After
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeated sobs she becomes calm, and slowly rises and seats herself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on a neighboring sofa. This scene of fatal _dénouement_ lasted eight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,minutes. She finally awakens, remembering to have seen in a dream the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dead body of a man stretched on a funeral pile, and a woman whom some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,men were forcing to ascend the pile against her will.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There was nothing Oriental in the succeeding seances, and the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dream did not appear again until four weeks later.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,April 7.—Mlle. Smith went quickly into a mixed state, in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo dream was mingled and substituted, but only so far as concerns
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me, for the feeling of present reality. She believes me absent, asks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other sitters why I have gone away, then rises and begins to walk
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,around me and look at me, very much surprised at seeing my place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupied by a stranger with black curly hair and of brown complexion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clothed in a robe with flowing sleeves of blue, and with gold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ornaments. When I speak to her she turns around and seems to hear my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,voice from the opposite side, whither she goes to look for me; when I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,go towards her she shuns me; then, when I follow her, she returns to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the place I had just left. After some time occupied in these manœuvres
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she ceases to be preoccupied with me and my substitute in the blue
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,robe, and falls into a deeper state. She takes on the look of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seeress, and describes a kind of embattled château on a hill, where she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceives and recognizes the before-mentioned personage with the curly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hair, but in another costume and surrounded by very ugly black men, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,women “who are good looking.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Interrogated as to the meaning of this vision, Leopold replies: “_The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,city of Tchandraguiri in Kanaraau_” (_sic_); then he adds, a moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,later, “_There is a letter too many in the last word_,” and ends by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,giving the name _Kanara_, and adding the explanation “_of the fifteenth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,century_.” Upon awaking from this somnambulistic state, which lasted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two hours, Hélène recalls having had a dream of a personage with curly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hair, in a blue robe, richly ornamented with precious stones, with a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cutlass of gold, bent backward, suspended from a hook. She recollects
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having held a long conversation with him in a strange language which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she understood and spoke very well herself, although she no longer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knows the meaning of it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,April 14.—Very soon passing into a deep sleep, Mlle. Smith leaves the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table and gives herself up to a silent pantomime, at first smiling,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then finishing in sadness and by a scene of tears.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The meaning of this is explained by Leopold as follows: Hélène is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in India, in her palace of Tchandraguiri, in Kanara, _in 1401_, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she receives a declaration of love from the personage with the curly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hair, who is the Prince Sivrouka Nayaka, to whom she has been married
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for about a year. The prince has flung himself upon his knees, but he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inspires in her a certain fright, and she still regrets having left
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her native country in order to follow him. Leopold affirms that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will remember, on awaking, in French, all that the prince has said to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her in Sanscrit, and that she will repeat to us a part of it, but not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all, because it is too private. After awaking she seems in reality to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recall clearly her entire dream, and tells us that she found herself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on a hill, where they were building; that it was not exactly a city,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nor even a village, since there were no streets; that it was rather an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,isolated place in the country, and that which was being built was not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the form of a house; it had holes rather than windows (a fortress
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and loop-holes).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She found herself in a fine palace, very beautiful as to its interior,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but not its exterior. There was a great hall, decorated with greens,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with a grand staircase at the end, flanked by statues of gold. She held
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a long conversation there, not in French, with the swarthy personage
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the black curly hair and magnificent costume; he finally ascended
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the staircase, but she did not follow him.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She appeared to recall well the meaning of all that he said to her in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their conversation in a foreign language, but seemed embarrassed by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these memories, and would not consent to relate them to us.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,May 26.—In the course of this seance, as Hélène, in a silent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism, incarnates the Hindoo princess, I hand her a sheet of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paper and a pencil in the hope of obtaining some text or drawing. After
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,divers scribblings she traces the single word _Simadini_ in letters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which are not at all like her usual hand (see Fig. 34).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 34.  Simadini]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Then taking a fresh sheet, she seems to write on it with a happy smile,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,folds it carefully and thrusts it in her corsage, takes it out again,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and rereads it with rapture, etc. Leopold informs us that Simadini is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the name of the Hindoo princess, and that she is reading a love-letter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from Sivrouka. On awaking she remembers having been “in such a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beautiful palace,” and of having received there a very interesting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letter, but the contents of which she refused to disclose to us, being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidently too confidential.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I intercalate here two remarks apropos of the name Simadini, which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one of the first known examples of a handwriting of Mlle. Smith other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than her own normal hand.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: When, four months later, Leopold began to communicate in writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(pp. 98-103), a certain analogy in the formation of the letters, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the identical way of holding the pencil, caused us to believe that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was he who had already traced the word in Fig. 34. But he has always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,denied it, and we have never been able to discover the author of it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: I said above, (p. 204), that there had been divergences in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the orthography of this name. Here, in substance, is a fragment of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letter which Mlle. Smith wrote me in the winter following (February 18,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1896), depicting to me the vexatious impressions which she still had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“... I am very sad, and I cannot tell why. I have a heavy heart, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for what reason I do not know myself. It came to such a pass to-day
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(you are going to laugh) that it seemed to me as though my left cheek
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had grown perceptibly thinner. I am sure that at this moment you would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not recognize Simadini, so piteous and discouraged is her countenance!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Think, that at the very moment in which I trace these words, I hear a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,voice speaking to me in my right ear: “_Not Simadini, but Simandini!_”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,What do you think that can be? It is very strange, is it not? Have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we misunderstood that name? Or, perhaps, may it not be I who have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,misunderstood it?...”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith here forgets that the name did not come to her on the first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasion by auditive hallucination, in which case it might be that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had misunderstood it, but by writing in somnambulism, which excludes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any mistake of her ordinary consciousness. We must confine ourselves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to registering as a fact, inexplicable hitherto, this correction of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a graphic automatism by an auditive automatism at the end of several
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,months. Between the two orthographies, I have adopted the second, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has undergone no further changes, and figures only in the Martian texts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(10, 16).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,June 16.—Fuller repetition of the scene of the letter of the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prince. Impossible to learn the contents of it. I suggest to her to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remember and to relate them to us upon awakening, but Leopold replies:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_She will not reveal it. Why have you not gained her confidence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sufficiently, that she may tell you everything without fear?_” and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestion had no effect.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,June 30.—Somnambulism with silent pantomime, the meaning of which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,given by Leopold: It is the scene of the betrothal of Simandini and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivrouka at Tchandraguiri. There is first a phase of oppression, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sighs and gestures as of a struggle against various pretenders who wish
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to seize her; then laughter and ecstasy, provoked by the arrival of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivrouka, who delivers her and drives off his rivals; finally, joy and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,admiration on accepting the flowers and jewels which he offers her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have reported, too much at length perhaps, though still greatly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abridged, these first appearances of the Oriental romance, because
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they form a continuous series, in the reverse of the chronological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,order, conformably to a spiritistic theory which holds that in these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories of previous existences the mediumistic memory goes back and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovers the “images” of the more recent events before those which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are more remote. During this first period of four months, the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cycle made irruption into eight seances (about one-twentieth of those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at which I have been present since I have had knowledge of them), and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has manifested itself somewhat like the panorama of a magic lantern,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unfolding itself in successive tableaux.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This whole history can be summed up by a few principal tableaux: there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was the scene of the death on the funeral pile, prepared in vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the seance of the 6th of March and executed on the 10th; then the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scene of the interior of the palace and the fortress in process of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,construction (7th and 14th of April); that of the love-letter (26th of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,May and 16th of June); finally, the betrothal (30th of June). There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must be added to these the grand tableau at the beginning, first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presented in vision the 3d of March, then realized three days later
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the astonishing exclamation Atièyâ Ganapatinâmâ. The meaning of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this scene has never been explained by Leopold, but seems to be quite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clear. A species of prologue can be seen in it, or even apotheosis,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inaugurating the entire romance; it is the Hindoo princess of four
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,centuries ago recognizing her lord and master in flesh and blood, under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the unexpected form of a university professor, whom she greets with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an emphasis wholly Oriental in blessing him, very appropriately, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the name of the divinity of science and of wisdom—since Ganapati is an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equivalent of Ganesâ, the god with the head of an elephant, patron of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sages and savants.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It can be easily conceived that these two words of Oriental resonance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoken aloud at a period at which the Martian was not yet born—and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,followed by all the conversations unfortunately unheard by us, which at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the waking at the subsequent seances Hélène recalled having held in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange language (in _Sanscrit_, according to Leopold) with the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prince of her dreams—would excite a lively curiosity and a desire to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtain longer audible fragments of this unknown idiom. It was only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in September, 1895, that this satisfaction was afforded us, during a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seance at which the Oriental romance, which had given no further sign
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of life since the month of June, made a new outbreak. Starting from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that moment, it has never ceased during these four years to reappear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,irregularly, and, suffering some eclipses, accompanied on each occasion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by words of a _Sanscritoid_ aspect. But the plot of the romance has no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,longer the same clearness that it showed at the beginning. In place of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tableaux linking themselves in a regular chronological order, they are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often no more than confused reminiscences, memories, without precise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bonds between them, which gush forth from the memory of Simandini. As
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the fragments of our youthful years surge up incoherent and pell-mell
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in our dreams, Mlle. Smith, too, finds herself easily assailed in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulisms by visions connected with certain episodes, and not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forming an entire continuation of supposed Asiatic pre-existence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Some of these scenes concern her life as a young Arab girl. One sees
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her there, for example, playing joyously with her little monkey,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mitidja; or copying an Arab text (see Fig. 35, p. 312), which her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,father, the sheik, surrounded by his tribes, furnishes her; or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,embarking on a strange boat, escorted by black Hindoos, for her new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,country, etc. But much the larger number of her somnambulistic trances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her spontaneous visions have reference to her life in India and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the details of her daily existence. Her bath, which the faithful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,domestic Adèl prepares for her; her walks and reveries in the splendid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gardens of the palace, all full of a luxurious vegetation and rare
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,birds of brilliant colors; her scenes of tenderness and of affectionate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,effusions—always stamped, this is to be noted, with the most perfect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,propriety—towards the Prince Sivrouka, when he is kindly disposed;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scenes of regret also and abundant tears for the memory of her far-off
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,native land, when the capricious and brutal humor of the Oriental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,despot makes itself too severely felt; conversation with the fakir
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Kanga; devotions and religious ceremonies before some Buddhist image,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc., all this forms an _ensemble_ extremely varied and full of local
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,color. There is in the whole being of Simandini—in the expression of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her countenance (Hélène almost always has her large eyes open in this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism), in her movements, in the quality of her voice when she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaks or chants Hindoo—a languishing grace, an abandon, a melancholy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sweetness, a something of languor and of charm, which corresponds
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wonderfully with the character of the Orient, as the spectators
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conceive it to be, who, like me, have never been there, etc. With all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this a bearing always full of _noblesse_ and dignity conforms to that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which one would expect of a princess; there are no dances, for example,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing of the _bayadère_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith is really very wonderful in her Hindoo somnambulisms. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,way in which Simandini seats herself on the ground, her legs crossed,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or half stretched out, nonchalantly leaning her arms or her head
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against a Sivrouka, who is sometimes real (when in her incomplete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trance she takes me for her prince), sometimes imaginary; the religious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and solemn gravity of her prostrations when, after having for a long
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time balanced the fictitious brazier, she crosses her extended hands
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on her breast, kneeling and bowing herself three times, her forehead
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,striking the ground; the melancholy sweetness of her chants in a minor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,key, wailing and plaintive melodies, which unfold themselves in certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flute-like notes, prolonged in a slow decrescendo, and only dying away
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the end of a single note held for fully fourteen seconds; the agile
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suppleness of her swaying and serpentine movements, when she amuses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself with her imaginary monkey, caresses it, embraces it, excites
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it, scolds it laughingly, and makes it repeat all its tricks—all this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so varied mimicry and Oriental speech have such a stamp of originality,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of ease, of naturalness, that one asks in amazement whence it comes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to this little daughter of Lake Leman, without artistic education or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,special knowledge of the Orient—a perfection of play to which the best
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,actress, without doubt, could only attain at the price of prolonged
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,studies or a sojourn on the banks of the Ganges.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The problem, as I have already stated, is not yet solved, and I am
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obliged still to endeavor to discover whence Hélène Smith has derived
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her ideas in regard to India. It seems that the more simple method
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would be to take advantage of the hypnotic state of the seances to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtain a confession from Hélène’s subconscious memory, and persuade it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to disclose the secret; but my efforts in that direction have not as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,yet succeeded. It is doubtless incompetency on my part, and I will end,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perhaps—or some one better qualified than I—in finding the joint in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,armor. The fact is that hitherto I have always run up against Leopold,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who will not allow himself to be ejected or ridiculed, and who has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never ceased to affirm that the Sanscrit, Simandini, and the rest are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,authentic. All the trails which I have thought I have discovered—and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they are already numerous—have proved false. The reader must pardon me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for not going into the details of my failures in this regard.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If it was only a question of the Hindoo pantomime the mystery would not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be so great: some recitations at school, newspaper articles concerning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the incineration of the widows of Malabar, engravings and descriptions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relative to the civil and religious life of India, etc.—in short, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,varied sources of information which, in a civilized country and at our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,epoch of cosmopolitanism, inevitably meet some time or other the eyes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or ears of every one of us and form part of the equipment (conscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or unconscious) of every individual who is not altogether uncultured,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would more than suffice to explain the scene of the funeral pile,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the prostrations, and the varied attitudes. There are, indeed, some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well-known examples showing how small a thing a cunning intelligence,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnished with a good memory and a fertile and plastic imagination,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,needs in order to reconstruct or fabricate out of nothing a complex
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,edifice, having every appearance of authenticity, and capable of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,holding in check for a considerable length of time the perspicacity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,even of skilled minds. But that which conscious and reflecting labor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has succeeded in accomplishing in the cases referred to, the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculties can execute to a much higher degree of perfection in the case
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of persons subject to automatic tendencies.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But two points remain, which complicate the case of the Hindoo romance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and seem to defy—thus far, at least—all normal explanation, because
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they surpass the limits of a simple play of the imagination. These are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the precise _historical_ information given by Leopold, some of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,can be, in a certain sense, verified; and the Hindoo _language_ spoken
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by Simandini, which contains words more or less recognizable, the real
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of which is adapted to the situation in which they have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoken. But, even if Hélène’s imagination could have reconstructed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the manners and customs and scenes of the Orient from the general
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,information floating in some way in cosmopolitan atmosphere, still one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cannot conceive whence she has derived her knowledge of the language
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and of certain obscure episodes in the history of India. These two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,points deserve to be examined separately.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,II. SIVROUKA AND M. DE MARLÈS
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When Kanara, Sivrouka, Simandini, etc., successively made their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance, slowly spelled out by Leopold, with the date of 1401, my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,companions of the seance and I hastened to investigate Brouillet, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brought to mind the province of Malabar in connection with the first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these names, but left us in utter darkness as to the others. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,geography of Vivien Saint-Martin revealed the existence of no fewer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than three Tchandraguiris—a hill, a river, and a small town in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,district of Arcot-Nord (Madras). The latter—or rather its citadel
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the summit of the hill—answered quite well to the description
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,given by Hélène in her visions of the 7th and 14th of April, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the construction of this fortress dates back only to 1510, and this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,locality is very far removed from the Kanara where Leopold locates this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entire story (see pp. 286-288).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to Sivrouka and his surroundings, neither biographical dictionaries
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nor encyclopædias were able to furnish me the least hint on this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject. Living historians or Orientalists to whom I addressed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,myself were of a discouraging unanimity in replying that they did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not recognize even the names, the historic correctness of which they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regarded as doubtful, and they did not at all remember having met with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them in works of fiction.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I have there,” said a learned professor of history, showing me a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,good-sized bookcase, “numerous works on the history of India; but they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relate only to the north of the peninsula; and as to what transpired
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the south during the period to which you refer, we know almost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing. Your names are unknown to me and do not recall to my mind any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personage, real or fictitious.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“The very name of Sivrouka seems to me improbable as a Hindoo name”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,replied another, who was unable to give me any more information on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I greatly regret,” wrote a third, on receipt of Hélène’s texts, “not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to have succeeded in getting upon the trail of the recollections of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,your medium. I cannot think of any book which would be likely to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,furnish the information. Tchandraguiri and Mangalore (where several
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scenes of the Hindoo cycle are located) are correct, but Madras (_id._)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,did not exist in 1401. Its name and foundation do not go further back
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than the seventeenth century. That region was then a dependency of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kingdom of Vijayanagara, and a naïk in the service of those princes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resided successively at Tchandraguiri and at Mangalore. I can make
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing of Sivrouka; the king of Vijayanagara, in 1402, was Bukkha II.,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or Bukkha called Siribukkha, Tiribukkha. But the naïk who so often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,changed his residence was evidently not a ruling prince. Was it a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,romance? Certain details caused me to doubt it. A romancer so careful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in regard to local coloring as to introduce into his narrative Indian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words, would not have given the title of the prince under the Sanscrit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,form _Nayaka_, but would have used the vulgar form naïk; he would not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have made the wife, in speaking to her husband, call him by his name
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivrouka (as Hélène constantly does in this somnambulism). I have no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollection of having read anything of this kind, and I know of no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,work of fiction from which the story might have been taken.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It will be readily understood that I was annoyed at not being able to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,establish clearly my presumed Asiatic previous existence. However,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while professional science was administering to me these cold douches,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I continued, on my own account, to search the libraries at my disposal,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and here one fine day I accidentally came across, in an old history of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,India, in six volumes, by a man named De Marlès, the following passages:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Kanara and the neighboring provinces on the side towards Delhi may be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regarded as the Georgia of Hindustan; it is there, it is said, that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,most beautiful women are to be found; the natives, however, are very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,jealous in guarding them, and do not often allow them to be seen by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strangers.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Tchandraguiri, which signifies _Mountain of the Moon_, is a vast
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fortress constructed, in 1401, by the rajah Sivrouka Nayaka. This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prince, as also his successors, belonged to the sect of the Djaïns.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At last! With what a beating heart did I fasten my eyes on that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,irrefutable historic evidence that my preceding incarnation, under the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beautiful skies of India was not a myth! I felt new life in my veins.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I reread twenty times those blessed lines, and took a copy of them to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,send to those pretended savants who were ignorant even of the name of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivrouka, and allowed doubts to be cast upon his reality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Alas! my triumph was of brief duration. It seems that the testimony
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of De Marlès is not of the highest order. This author is held in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slight esteem in well-informed circles, as may be seen from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following passage in a letter of M. Barth, which merely expresses, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a vigorous and lively manner, an opinion which other specialists have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confirmed:[22]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“It is through a letter of M. Flournoy that I learn that there has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existed since 1828 in Paris, printed in Roman characters, a history
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of India by De Marlès containing a statement that the fortress of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Candragiri was built in 1401, and that its founder was Sivrouka Nayaka.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,What new facts there are in books one no longer consults! And that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of De Marlès is, indeed, one of those that are no longer consulted.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I found it yesterday at the library of the Institute. It would have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been impossible to have done worse, even in 1828. But sometimes we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,find pearls in a dung-hill, and perhaps this Sivrouka Nayaka is one of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them. Unfortunately, the author gives no hint as to the sources of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,information; and later, in his fourth volume, in which he narrates the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,history of the twelfth to the sixteenth centuries, he does not say a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,word more either of Candragiri or of Sivrouka.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here was a terrible blow to my Hindoo existence, which poor M. de
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Marlès had so well established for me.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nevertheless, the hope still lingers that his information, although not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reproduced by later writers more highly esteemed, may perhaps still be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correct. This is quite possible, since science has not yet spoken its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last word in this department, hardly even its first, if men still more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,competent may be believed, beginning with M. Barth himself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Up to the present moment,” says he, “there is no trustworthy history
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the south of the peninsula.... The Dravidian languages of India is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a domain very unfamiliar to the majority of Indian scholars.... There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is nothing to draw upon but some works and monographs on the aboriginal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chronicles and legendary traditions; and it would be necessary to know
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Dravidian languages on the one hand and Arabic on the other, to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to examine or even consult them with profit. The only works which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we are able to follow are those which undertake to make this history by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,epigraphic documents, but these, thus far, say nothing of Simandini, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Adèl, of Mitidja, or even of Sivrouka.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This silence of epigraphy is certainly to be regretted; but who knows
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whether it will not some day enlighten us by proving De Marlès to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be right—and also Leopold—by narrating to us the true story of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo princess, the Arabian monkey, and the slave Adèl! It costs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing to hope! Already, thanks again to M. Barth, I have gained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,information concerning another Tchandraguiri than the one of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,District of North Arcot mentioned by Vivien de Saint-Martin—_i.e._, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Tchandraguiri, situated in South Kanara, and in the citadel of which a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hitherto unknown inscription has been discovered which must date back
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the time of King Harihara II., of Vijayanagara, who reigned at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning of the fifteenth century.[23] Here is something approaching
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the somnambulistic revelations of Mlle. Smith. While awaiting their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,definite confirmation by new archæological discoveries, traces of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivrouka may be sought for in the earlier works upon which De Marlès
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must have drawn. Unfortunately these works are not easy to find, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are inconvenient to consult. Professor Michel, of the University of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Liège, has had the kindness to run through those of Buchanan[24] and of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Rennell,[25] but without result.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If De Marlès did not invent Sivrouka out of whole cloth, which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hardly supposable, it was very probably in the translation of Ferishta
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by Dow,[26] that he found his facts. I have, unhappily, not yet been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able myself to consult that very rare work, which is not to be found
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in Geneva, so far as I am aware, nor to obtain accurate information
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regarding its contents.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The uncertainty which hovers over the historical problem extends,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,naturally, to the psychological problem also. It is clear that if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain inscriptions, or even some old work, should come some day to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tell us not only of Sivrouka, but of Simandini, of Adèl, and the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages who figure in Hélène’s Hindoo romance, but of whom De Marlès
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not whisper a word, we should no longer care about the latter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,author, and the question would then be as follows: Could Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have had cognizance of these early works, and if not, how do their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contents reappear in her somnambulism? But in the actual condition of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,things, and all allowance made for possible surprises in the future,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I do not hesitate to regard as the more probable and more rational
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposition, that it was really the passage of De Marlès, quoted above,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which furnished the subliminal memory of Hélène the precise date of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1401—and the three names of the fortress, the province, and the rajah.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Various other traits of the visions of Mlle. Smith betray likewise the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same inspiration. The scene in which she sees them engaged in building,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her description of that which is being built, suggest clearly the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea of a fortress furnished by the text. The translation _Mountain of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Moon_ contributed to causing her to locate the scene upon a hill.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The beauty of the women of the country, on which De Marlès dwells, has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its echo in the remark of Hélène that the women whom she sees are “good
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,looking.” Finally, the princely character of Sivrouka, mentioned by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,De Marlès, is found throughout the length of the entire romance, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,displays itself in the splendor of his costume, of the palace, of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gardens, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is possible that the names and the nationality of the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages—Simandini, Adèl, the monkey, the sheik, etc.—may have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,borrowed from some unknown work, which would be, for the Arabian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,portion of the narrative, the pendant to De Marlès for the Hindoo past.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This may be, but it is not necessary. It is permissible to regard,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,provisionally, the imaginations built up around Sivrouka, as an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ingenious expedient, by means of which Hélène’s imagination finds a way
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of binding to that central figure, and also of blending in a single
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole, her other Oriental memories not specifically Hindoo.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The hypothesis which I am about to assume, which connects directly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with De Marlès the data of Hélène’s Asiatic dream, contained likewise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the work of that author, arouses, nevertheless, two objections. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first is drawn from the slight differences of orthography between the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,text of De Marlès and the words spoken by Leopold. This difficulty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is only insurmountable by elevating the inerrancy of the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory to the plane of absolute infallibility, though the latter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must be admitted to be ordinarily very much superior to that of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conscious memory. But the favorite comparison of the forgotten
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories, reappearing in somnambulisms, to unchangeable, absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,true photographic impressions, causes us readily to exaggerate the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fidelity of the unconscious memory-images. The example of certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dreams—in which memories of childhood sometimes return with a startling
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clearness, but, nevertheless, altered or distorted in some details,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conformably to later experiences or to recent events—suffices to show
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that automatisms of the memory are not always sheltered by influences
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the imagination, nor absolutely free from error.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In this particular case there are two divergences between De Marlès and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold: the latter has substituted a _k_ for the _c_ in Nayaca, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has omitted the _n_ in Tchandraguiri (compare pp. 286 and 288). Another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mistake, which he immediately corrected, consisting in dictating first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_Kanaraau_, was evidently a confusion such as frequently occurs in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,writing, occasioned by a too rapid passing from the word _Kanara_ to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the information following, and already about to come—“_au_ fifteenth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,century.” The spelling Nayaka, instead of Nayaca, is attributable to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the termination of the word _Sivrouka_, which precedes it. Identity of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pronunciation has produced identity of orthography.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The second objection is of a negative character. It consists in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossibility of showing where, when, or how Mlle. Smith obtained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cognizance of the text of De Marlès.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I admit frankly that I know nothing about it, and I give full credit to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène for the indomitable and persevering energy with which she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never ceased to protest against my hypothesis, which has the faculty of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exasperating her in the highest degree—and one readily understands that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it would naturally do so. For it is in vain that she digs down to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very bottom of her memories; she does not discover the slightest trace
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this work. And not only that, but how can one seriously suppose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that she has ever had the slightest intimation of it, since she never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,studied the history of India, has neither read nor heard anything on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the subject, the very name of De Marlès having been utterly unknown to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her up to the day on which she learned that I suspected that author of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being the source of the Hindoo romance? It must, indeed, be admitted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the idea of the passage in question having come before the eyes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or ears of Mlle. Smith through any ordinary channel seems a trifle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absurd. I only know in Geneva of two copies of the work of De Marlès,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,both covered with dust—the one belonging to the Société de Lecture, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,private association of which none of the Smith family nor any friend
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of theirs was ever a member; the other in the Public Library, where,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,among the thousands of more interesting and more modern books, it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,now very rarely consulted. It could only have happened, therefore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by a combination of absolutely exceptional and almost unimaginable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circumstances that the work of De Marlès could have found its way into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s hands; and how could it have done so and she not have the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slightest recollection of it?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I acknowledge the force of this argument, and that the wisest thing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to do is to leave the matter in suspense. But if the question must
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be decided, though there is scarcely any choice, extravagance for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extravagance, I still prefer the hypothesis which only invokes natural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possibilities to that which appeals to occult causes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Possibly the work of De Marlès may have been heard of by Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without her normal consciousness taking note of it. Either when among
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her friends or acquaintances, or with her parents, she might have heard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some passages read in her young days, etc. The fact that she has no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conscious recollection of it proves nothing against such a supposition
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to any one who is at all familiar with the play of our faculties.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It goes without saying that my method of reasoning is the inverse of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that which generally prevails in spiritistic circles. Witness the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,celebrated Aksakoff, as a single example, who, discovering that a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious typtological message was found already in print in a book
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which could not readily have come to the knowledge of the medium, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recognizing the fact that the message came from that book, says: “But
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in what way could the brain of the medium have been made aware of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contents of the book? There is the mystery. _I refuse to admit that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could have been through natural means. I believe it was by some occult
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,process._”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Very well! this is plain language, and the frankness of the declaration
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,charms me to such a degree that I cannot resist the temptation to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appropriate it for myself in the case of Mlle. Smith and M. de Marlès,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,transposing only two words: “_I refuse to admit that it could have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been through occult means. I believe it was by some natural process._”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Evidently, in doubtful cases (which are in an enormous majority), in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the natural and the occult explanations are in direct opposition,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without the possibility of a material demonstration as to which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,true in fact, a decision must be reached in accordance with personal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taste and feeling. Between these two methodological points of view
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a reconciliation is scarcely possible. The reader may think what he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will. But, right or wrong, I claim the first of these as my opinion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and regard the tendency of the supernatural and occult to substitute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves, on account of the insufficiency of our knowledge, for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,acquired rights of natural hypothesis, as an unjustifiable reversal of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rôles.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To those who shall find my hypothesis decidedly too extravagant—or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,too simple—remains a choice between the multiple forms of occult
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypothesis. Shall it be Leopold who, in his all-powerful state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disincarnation, has read in the closed volume of De Marlès? Or has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there, indeed, been a telepathic transmission of this passage from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brain of some unknown terrestrial reader to that of Mlle. Smith? Shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it be with her a case of clairvoyance, of lucidity, of intuition in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the astral body; or, again, of trickery on the part of some facetious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirit? And if, taking the reincarnationist theory seriously, it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,admitted that Sivrouka, 1401, and Tchandraguiri, are indeed really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reminiscences of the past life of Simandini, how explain that curious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coincidence in their choice and their spelling with precisely the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,designations used by M. de Marlès?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Verily my brain reels in the midst of all these alternatives, and I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hasten to pass to another subject.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,III. THE ARAB ELEMENTS OF THE ORIENTAL CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here is a problem for the partisans of the Oriental pre-existence of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith: How comes it that, recovering in her trances the use of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Hindoo which she formerly spoke at the court of Sivrouka, she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,totally forgotten Arabian, which, however, had been her mother-tongue
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in that same previous existence, and which she was accustomed to use
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exclusively up to the time of her departure from her native land, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her eighteenth year?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If the emotions caused by her royal marriage had destroyed all memory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the past, one could understand how the idiom might have become
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obscured along with the rest in that loss of memory of her life as a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,young girl.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But such was not the case. She preserved very vivid memories of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,father the sheik, of his tents gleaming in the sunlight, of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,people, of the camels and landscapes of Arabia. In many seances and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spontaneous visions she finds herself carried back to that first half
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of her Asiatic existence. But then she narrates in French that which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unfolded before her eyes, or gives herself up to a silent pantomime.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She has never spoken or written anything at all resembling Arabian. Can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it be supposed that already in her Hindoo life she had assimilated the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language of her adopted country to the point of losing even the latent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories of her maternal language? That would be contrary to all known
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological analogies.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,However, in saying that Hélène has never written or spoken Arabian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I exaggerate. On one occasion she spoke four words of it. It is the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exception which proves the rule. In fact, not only did she fail to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompany that single text with any pronunciation, but she executed it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as a drawing, and apparently copied, without comprehending, a model
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which an imaginary person presented to her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here is a review of that incident:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,October 27, 1895.—Shortly after the beginning of the seance Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith has an Arabian vision: “Look at those tents! There are no stones
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,here—it is all sand ... [she counts the tents one by one]. There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are twenty of them. That one is beautiful. Don’t you find it so, M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Lemaître—that largest one? It is fastened by cords and small stakes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,...“ etc. Then she describes the personages: The one who is smoking,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seated in a corner, with his legs crossed; others all black (the table
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,says they are negroes, and that the scene takes place in Arabia);
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then a man clothed in white, whom Hélène has the feeling of knowing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without being able to recognize him; she places her finger upon her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forehead, in the attitude of a person trying to remember, and the table
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(on which she has her left hand) informs us then that she lived in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Arabia in her life as Simandini, and that she is trying to recollect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those far-distant times. A quite long scene follows, in which her Arab
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reminiscences alternate and mingle with the consciousness of the real
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment, though she neither sees nor hears us. At this point a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of mental confusion ensues, which seems to be very painful to her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“... M. Lemaître! M. Flournoy! are you there? Answer me, then. Did I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not come here this evening? If only I could ... however, I am not _en
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,voyage_.... I really believe it is Sunday at last ... I understand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing more about it. I think my brain is so tired that all my ideas
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are mixed up ... however, I am not dreaming.... It seems to me that I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have also lived with them ... [the sitters at the table], and with them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[the Arabs of her vision].... But I know them—all those men. Tell me,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then, who you are! Did you arrive in Geneva lately? [They are, says the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table, Arabs who lived five centuries ago, among them the father of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Simandini.] Come nearer, then, come here. I want you to speak to me!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Lemaître! Oh, that pretty little sketch! What is that sketch? [The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table having said that it is a drawing which her father is presenting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her, and that she can copy it, a pencil and a sheet of paper are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,placed before her, the latter of which seems to be transformed into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,papyrus in her dream.] That green leaf is pretty. Of what plant is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it the leaf? I think I have a pencil; I am going to try to make this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sketch....”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After the usual struggle between the two methods of holding the pencil
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(see pp. 100-102), she yields to Leopold’s manner of holding it,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saying, “So much the worse”; then traces, slowly and with great care,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 35, from left to right, often raising her eyes to her imaginary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,model, as if copying a drawing. After which she goes profoundly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asleep; then other somnambulisms come.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On awaking she recollects the state of confusion through which she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passed. “Wretched evening,” said she. “I was unhappy. I felt that I was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,living here, as I always have, and I saw some things as though I were a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,foreigner. I was with you, but I was living elsewhere,” etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This whole scene gives the distinct impression that the Arab phrase
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only existed in Hélène’s recollection as a visual memory, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning or any verbal images. It was for her an incomprehensible piece
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of writing, a simple drawing, like Chinese or Japanese characters would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be for us. Evidently it was a text which had come before her eyes at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some propitious moment, and, having been absorbed by the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagination—always on the watch for matters of Oriental aspect—had been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incorporated in a scene of the Asiatic dream.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 35. Arabian text drawn from left to right by Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Smith in hemisomnambulism: elqalil men elhabib ktsir, _the little from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the friend (is) much_. Natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Such, at least, is the supposition which seems to me the most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,plausible. For, to regard it as a fragment of Arabian, which Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could speak and write fluently if she were in an appropriate state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism—as Leopold pretended one day to be the fact—seems to me an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypothesis still more arbitrary, and little in accord with the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trance phenomena of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Occasions have not been wanting to her in the five years during which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her exotic romances have been unfolding themselves to make use of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposed philological reserves by speaking and writing Arabian, if her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal memory had so desired.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She has presented all degrees and kinds of somnambulism, and more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions of Arabia than could have failed to awaken by association the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corresponding idiom, if it really was slumbering in her. The complete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and total isolation of the text given above, in the midst of this flood
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Oriental scenes, seems to me, therefore, to testify strongly in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,favor of my supposition that it has to do with a visual flash, unique
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in its kind, accidentally encountered and stored up, and that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Asiatic secondary personality of Mlle. Smith is absolutely ignorant of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Arabic.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Concerning the other details of the Arab somnambulisms of Hélène, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have nothing to say; they do not go beyond the ideas which she could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unconsciously have gathered from the surrounding environment; and to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other sources of her knowledge must be added whatever she might
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have heard from her father, who had at one time lived in Algeria.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The proper names connected with the Arab scenes, with the possible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exception of Pirux, awaken certain associations of ideas, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,making it possible to affirm anything with certainty as to their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,origin.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,IV. THE HINDOO LANGUAGE OF MLLE. SMITH
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The nature of the Hindoo language of Hélène is less easy to explain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clearly than that of the Martian, because it has never been possible to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtain either a literal translation of it or written texts. Besides,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being ignorant of the numberless dialects of ancient and modern India,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and not believing it to be incumbent upon me to devote myself to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their study solely that I might be able to appreciate at their proper
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,value the philological exploits of an entranced medium, I am not in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a situation to allow myself any personal judgment in regard to this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,matter.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is not even left to me the resource of placing the parts of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,process as a whole before the reader, as I have done in the case of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian, for the reason that our ignorance of Hélène’s Hindoo, added
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her rapid and indistinct pronunciation—a real prattle sometimes—has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caused us to lose the greater part of the numerous words heard in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,course of some thirty Oriental scenes scattered over a space of four
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Even the fragments which we have been able to note down present for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the most part so much uncertainty that it would be idle to publish all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of them. I have communicated the best of them to several distinguished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Oriental scholars. From certain information which they have kindly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,given me, it appears that the _soi-disant_ Hindoo of Hélène is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any fixed idiom known to these specialists; but, on the other hand,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there are to be found in it, more or less disfigured and difficult
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to recognize, certain terms or roots which approach more nearly to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit than any actual language of India, and the meaning of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,often very well corresponds with the situations in which these words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been uttered. I proceed to give some examples of them:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. The two words, =atiêyâ ganapatinâmâ=, which inaugurated the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language on the 6th of March, 1895 (see p. 282), and which were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,invested at that moment, in the mouth of Simandini, with the evident
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of a formula of salutation or of benediction, addressed to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,late husband, inopportunely returned, were articulated in a manner so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impressive and so solemn that their pronunciation leaves scarcely any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,room for doubt.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is all the more interesting to ascertain the accord of my scientist
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correspondents upon the value of these two words; the first recalls to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them nothing precise or applicable to the situation, but the second
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is a flattering and very appropriate allusion to the divinity of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo Pantheon, which is more actively interesting to the professional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. P. Oltramare, to whom I sent these words, without saying anything
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to their source, replied: “There is nothing more simple than the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,word =ganapatinâmâ=; it means, ‘_who bears the name of Ganapati_,’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which is the same as _Ganesa_.... As to =atiêyâ=, that word has not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a Hindoo appearance; it might perhaps be =atreya=, which, it seems,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,serves as a designation for women who have suffered an abortion, an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explication which, however, I do not guarantee. [In order to affirm
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more concerning these words, it would be necessary to know] whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they are really Sanscrit, since if they belong to the vulgar languages,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I excuse myself absolutely.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Glardon, who is more familiar with the vulgar languages and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaks Hindustani fluently, did not hint to me of any other meaning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for =atiêyâ= and saw also in the other word “an epithet of honor,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,literally, ‘_named Ganapati_,’ familiar name of the god Ganesa.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. de Saussure also found no meaning whatever for the first term, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which he inclines now to see an arbitrary creation of the Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,order, and he remarked that in the second, “the two words, =Ganapati=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well-known divinity, and =nâmâ=, _name_, are constructed together,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in some inexplicable manner, but not necessarily false. It is quite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious,” adds he, “that this fragment, which is mixed up with the name
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a god, may be properly pronounced with a kind of solemn emphasis
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a gesture of religious benediction. This denotes, indeed, an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intelligent and intentional use.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,According to this first brief specimen, therefore, Hélène’s Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appears to be a mixture of improvised articulations and of veritable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit words adapted to the situation. Later specimens only serve to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corroborate this impression.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. The next outbreak of Hindoo took place five months later (September
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,15, 1895), in the midst of a very long Oriental seance, in which I only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refer to points especially interesting to us—to wit, Hélène’s supposed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit, the French interpretation which Leopold gave of it, and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious evidences of agreement of these two texts.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In one tender scene, with sighs and tears, in connection with Sivrouka,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène uttered in an exceedingly sweet voice the following words:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=ou mama priva= (or =prira, priya=)—=mama radisivou=—=mama sadiou
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sivrouka=—=apa tava va signa damasa=—=simia damasa bagda sivrouka=.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,During the various phases which precede the awaking, I ask Leopold the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of these words. He at first refused to give it, saying, “Find
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it out yourself”; then, as I insist, “I would have preferred that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,you found it out yourself.” I beg him to give at least the correct
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spelling of an Oriental text furnished us in so uncertain a manner,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but he disappeared, saying he was ignorant of Sanscrit. By means of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,later questions which he answers by “yes” and “no,” it is discovered
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that they are words of love from Simandini to her husband, who was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about to leave her for a voyage to his principality. Then suddenly, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the awaking seems to be approaching, Leopold moves the index-finger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feverishly, and commences to dictate impatiently: “_Hasten_ [to spell]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,... My good, my excellent, my dearly loved Sivrouka, without thee where
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to find happiness?” His answers to our questions lead us to understand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that this is the substantial meaning of all the Sanscrit spoken that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evening (and given above), that it is not he, Leopold, who speaks this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language to Hélène, because he does not understand it, but that it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indeed he who gives us the French equivalent for it, not by a literal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation of the words themselves, since he does not understand them,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but by interpreting the inmost feelings of Mlle, Smith, with which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he is perfectly familiar. Shortly afterwards Hélène awakes without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recollection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,According to M. de Saussure there are certainly in this text some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit fragments answering more or less to the interpretation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold. The most clear are =mama priya=, which signifies _my dear,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my dearly loved_, and =mama sadiou= (corrected to =sâdhô=), _my good,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my excellent_. The rest of the phrase is less satisfactory in its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present condition; =tava= could well be _of thee_, but =apa tava= is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a pure barbarism, if it is intended for _far from thee_. In the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,way the syllable =bag= in =bagda= seems to mean, independently of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,translation of Leopold, =bhâga=, _happiness_, but is surrounded by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incomprehensible syllables.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. In a subsequent seance (December 1, 1895), Hélène gave herself up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to a varied series of somnambulistic pantomimes representing scenes in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the life of Simandini, which were thought to be located at Mangalore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and in the course of which several Hindoo words escaped her, of which,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unhappily, no interpretation could be obtained from Leopold. But here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again, if one is not too difficult to satisfy, a meaning more or less
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adapted to the pantomime is finally discovered.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the midst of a playful scene with her little monkey, Mitidja, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tells him in her sweetest and most harmonious tones (A), =mama kana
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sour= (or =sourde=) =mitidya= ... =kana mitidya= (_ter_). Later,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,answering her imaginary prince, who, according to Leopold, has just
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,given her a severe admonition (the reason for which is not known), and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to which she listened with an air of forced submission, and, almost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sneeringly, she tells him (B), =adaprati tava sivrouka= ... =nô simyô
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sinonyedô= ... =on yediô sivrouka=. Returning to a better feeling and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,leaning towards him, she murmurs with a charming smile (C) =mama plia=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,... =mama naximi= (or =naxmi=) =sivrouka= ... =aô laos, mi sivrouka=.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the fragment (A), one may suppose the =mama kana= to be a term of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affection, taking the =kana= to be equivalent to the Sanscrit _kânta_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“beloved,” or _kanistha_, “darling,” unless it be translated, as M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Glardon does, =kana= (corrected to =khana=) =mitidya= _to eat for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mitidja_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the phrase (B), according to M. de Saussure, “the last words might,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with some show of reason, make us think of the word =anyediuh=, _the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following day_, or, _another day_, repeated twice; and, on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, the first word might be transformed into =adya-prabhrti=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_starting from to-day_; which, combined with other syllables,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves conventionally triturated, might give something like:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=adya-pra-bhrti tava, sivruka= ... =yôshin= ... =na anyediuh, any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ediuh=: _from to-day, of thee, Sivrouka, that I am_ ... _wife_ ... _not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,another day, another day_—which, besides (if it has any meaning at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all,) has scarcely any connection with the scene.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the phrase (C) the words =mama plia= evidently mean the same as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words above, =mama priya=, _my beloved_; =naxmi= might be =lakshmî=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_beauty and fortune_; and the last words might contain =asmi=, _I am_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While, therefore, recognizing some words of pure Sanscrit, the whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance of these first texts presents, on the other hand, certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,matters quite suspicious, from the point of view of construction, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the order of the words, and possibly also the correctness of the forms.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_E. g._,” observes M. de Saussure, “I do not remember that one can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,say in Sanscrit, ‘my Sivrouka,’ nor ‘my dear Sivrouka.’ One can well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,say =mama priya=, _my well beloved_, substantively; but =mama priya
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivruka= is quite another thing: but it is _my dear Sivrouka_ which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occurs most frequently. It is true,” adds my learned colleague, “that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing can be affirmed absolutely, especially concerning certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,epochs at which much bad Sanscrit was made in India. The resource
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always remains to us of assuming that, since the eleventh wife of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sivrouka was a child of Arabia, she had not had time to learn to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,express herself without error in the idiom of her lord and master,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up to the moment at which the funeral pile put an end to her brief
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existence.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The misfortune is, in assuming by hypothesis the point of view of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the romance, one exposes himself to another difficulty. “The most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprising thing,” remarks M. de Saussure, “is that Mme. Simandini
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoke Sanscrit, and not Pracrit (the connection of the first with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,second is the same as that between Latin and French, the one springing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the other, but the one is the language in which the savants
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,write, while the other is the spoken language). While in the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,drama the kings, the brahmins, and the personages of high degree are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observed habitually to use Sanscrit, it is questionable if such was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constantly the case in real life. But, under all circumstances, all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the women, even in the drama, speak Pracrit. A king addresses his wife
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the noble language (Sanscrit); she answers him always in the vulgar
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language. But the idiom of Simandini, even though it be a Sanscrit very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hard to recognize, is not in any case the Pracrit.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The numerous Hindoo speeches of Mlle. Smith during these latter years
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,give rise to certain analogous observations, and do not throw any new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,light on their origin. I shall confine myself to a few examples, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have chosen less for the sake of the Sanscritoid texts themselves,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which are also always defective and distorted, than for the reason that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the varied circumstances in which they have been produced afford a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain psychological interest.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,4. Scene of Chiromancy. In the course of a long Arab seance, then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo (February 2, 1896), Hélène knelt down by the side of my chair,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and, taking me for Sivrouka, seized and examined my hand, all the while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,carrying on a conversation in a foreign language (without seeming to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,notice my actual words). It seems that this conversation contained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some expression of anxiety in regard to my health, which had inspired
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,several somnambulisms of Mlle. Smith during the preceding months (an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,example will be found on pp. 121-122).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At the same time at which she attentively examines the lines of my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, she pronounces the following fragmentary sentences, separated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by silences corresponding to the hallucinatory replies of Sivrouka:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“=Priya sivrouka= ... =nô= [signifying No, according to Leopold] ...
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=tvandastroum sivrouka= ... =itiami adia priya= ... =itiami sivra
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adia= ... =yatou= ... =napi adia= ... =nô= ... =mama souka, mama baga
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sivrouka= ... =yatou=.” Besides sivra, which, Leopold says, is an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affectionate name for Sivrouka, we can divine in this text other terms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of affection: =priya=, _beloved_; =mama soukha, mama bhâga=, “_Oh, my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,delight, oh, my happiness!_” M. Glardon also calls attention to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,word =tvandastroum=, which approaches the Hindustani _tandarast_ (or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_tandurust_), “who is in good health”—_tandurusti_, “health,” coming
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the two words _tan_, “physical condition,” and _durust_, “good,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,true,” of Persian origin. But he adds that it is possibly only a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coincidence, and seems to me doubtful whether he would have thought of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the connection if it were not found in a scene of chiromancy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,5. The Hindoo cycle, like the others, makes numerous irruptions into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ordinary life of Mlle. Smith, and affects her personality in most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,varied degrees, from the simple waking vision of Oriental landscapes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or people up to the total incarnations of Simandini, of which Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preserves no memory whatever. One frequent form of these spontaneous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatisms consists in certain mixed states, in which she perceives
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages who seem to her objective and independent, while continuing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to have the feeling of a subjective implication or identification in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regard to them, the impression of an indefinable _tua res agitur_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It then easily happens that the conversations she has with them are a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mixture of French and a foreign language which she is wholly ignorant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of, though feeling the meaning of it. The following is an example:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,March 1, 1898.—Between five and six in the morning, while still in bed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but wide awake, as she affirms, Hélène had “a superb Hindoo vision.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Magnificent palace, with a huge staircase of white stone, leading to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,splendid halls furnished with low divans without cushions, of yellow,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,red, and more often of blue materials. In a boudoir a woman (Simandini)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reclining and leaning nonchalantly on her elbow; on his knees near her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a man with black curly hair, of dark complexion (Sivrouka), clothed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a large, red, embroidered robe, and speaking a foreign language,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not Martian, which Hélène did not know, but which, however, she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the feeling of comprehending inwardly, and which enabled her to write
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some sentences of it in French after the vision. While she _listened_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to this man speaking, she _saw_ the lips of the woman open, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hearing any sound come from her mouth, in such a way that she did not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,know what she said, but Hélène had at the same time the impression
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of answering _inwardly, in thought_, to the conversation of the man,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and she noted his reply. (This means, psychologically, that the words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Sivrouka gushed forth in auditive images or hallucinations, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the answers of Simandini-Hélène in psycho-motor-spoken images of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulation, accompanied by the usual representation of Simandini
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,effectuating the corresponding labial movements.) Here is a fragment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of conversation noted by Hélène in pencil at the outset of the vision,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her ordinary handwriting, but very irregular, attesting that she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not yet entirely regained her normal state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(Sivrouka.) “My nights without repose, my eyes red with tears,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Simandini, will not these touch at last thy =attamana=? Shall this day
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,end without _pardon, without love_?” (Simandini.) “Sivrouka, no, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,day shall not end without pardon, without love; the =sumina= has not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been launched far from me, as thou hast supposed; it is there—dost thou
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,see?” (Sivrouka.) “Simandini, my =soucca, maccanna baguea=—pardon me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again, always!“
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This little scrap of conversation, it may be remarked in passing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives quite correctly the emotional note, which is strong throughout
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the whole length of the Hindoo dream in the relationship of its two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chief personages. As to the Sanscritoid words which are there mingled
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the French, they have not an equal value. “=Sumina=,” says M. de
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Saussure, “recalls nothing. =Attamana=, at most =âtmânam= (accusative
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of =âtmâ=), _l’âme_, ‘the soul’; but I hasten to say that in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,context in which =attamana= figures one could not make use of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit word which resembles it, and which at bottom only signifies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(_âme_) ‘soul’ in philosophical language, and in the sense of ‘_l’âme
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,universelle_,’ or other learned meanings.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,6. The apparition of isolated Hindoo words, or words incorporated in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a non-Hindoo context, is not very rare with Hélène, and is produced
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes in auditive hallucinations, sometimes in her writings (see,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_e. g._, Fig. 37, p. 333); sometimes, again, in the course of words
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,uttered in hemisomnambulism more or less marked. The list which has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been collected of these detached terms shows the same mixture of pure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit and unknown words, which can only be connected with that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language by some transformation so arbitrary or forced as to destroy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,altogether the value of such comparison.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To this second category belong, for example, =gava=, =vindamini=,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=jotisse=, also spelled by Mlle. Smith. These terms, of whose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signification she is absolutely ignorant, struck her ear in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,course of a Hindoo vision which occurred in the morning when she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first awoke. The last of these words recalls to M. de Saussure the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit _jyôtis_, “a constellation”; but then he would pronounce it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_djiôtisse_, which hardly corresponds to the manner in which Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard and wrote it. There must be added to these examples certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo words which have made irruptions into some Martian texts.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These are _Adèl_, a proper name, and _yestad_, “unknown,” in text
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,13; and (in text 31) _vadasa_, which, according to the rest of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentence, seems to designate some divinities or some powers, and in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which MM. de Saussure and Glardon suspect a mangled reminiscence of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit term _dévâ-dâsa_, “slave of the gods.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,       *       *       *       *       *
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,7. To crown these specimens of the Sanscrit of Hélène, let us cite her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Hindoo chant,” which has made half a dozen appearances in the last two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years, and of which Leopold deigned, on a single occasion, to outline
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the translation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The utterances consist essentially of the Sanscrit word _gaya_ “chant,”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repeated to satiety, with here and there some other terms, badly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulated and offering discouraging variations in the notes taken by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the different hearers. I will confine myself to two versions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 36. Modulation of a Hindoo song. The final _G_ of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the three variations was held with perfect steadiness during fourteen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, seconds. The series A was often doubled and trebled before the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, continuation.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One of them is by Hélène herself. In a spontaneous vision (May 18,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1898, in the morning, upon awaking), she perceived a man, richly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dressed in yellow and blue (Sivrouka), reclining upon beautiful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cushions near a fountain surrounded by palm-trees; a brunette woman
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(Simandini) seats herself on the grass, sings to him in a strange
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language a ravishing melody. Hélène gathers the following fragments of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it in writing, in which may be recognized the disfigured text of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary song, “=Ga haïa vahaïyami= ... =vassen iata= ... =pattissaïa
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,priaïa=.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The other version is that of M. de Saussure, very much better qualified
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than we are to distinguish the Hindoo sounds. He was quite near
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, who sang seated upon the ground, whose voice for the moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,articulated so badly that several words escaped him, and he does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vouch for the accuracy of his text, which is as follows, as he wrote
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it to the measure: “=Gâya gaya naïa ia miya gayä briti= ... =gaya vaya
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,yâni pritiya kriya gayâni i gâya mamatua gaya mama nara mama patii si
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gaya gandaryô gâya ityami vasanta= ... =gaya gaya yâmi gaya priti gaya
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,priya gâya patisi=....”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It was towards the end of this same seance that Leopold, undoubtedly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the idea of doing honor to the distinguished presence of M. de
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Saussure, decided, after a scene of Martian translation (text 14, by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Esenale), to give us, in Hélène’s voice, his interpretation of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo chant, which follows, _verbatim_, with its mixture of Sanscrit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words: “Sing, bird, let us sing! =Gaya!= Adèl, Sivrouka, sing of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spring-time! Day and night I am happy! Let us sing! Spring-time bird,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,happiness! =ityâmi mamanara priti=, let us sing! let us love! my king!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Miousa, Adèl!”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In comparing these translations of the Hindoo text, certain points of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resemblance are discovered between them. Outside the two perfectly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correct words, =gâya=, _song_, and =vasanta=, _spring-time_, the idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of “_let us love_” is discovered in =priti= and =briti= (Sanscrit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_prîti_, the act of loving), and an approximate equivalent of “_my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,king_” in =mama patii=, recalling the Sanscrit _mama patê_, “my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,husband, my master.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is, unfortunately, hardly possible to carry the identification
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,further, except perhaps for _bird_, which, with some show of reason,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,might be suspected in =vayayâni=, vaguely recalling =vâyasân=
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(accusative plural of =vâyasa= _bird_).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to the melody of this plaintive ditty, M. Aug. de Morsier, who heard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it at the seance of the 4th of September, 1898, has kindly noted it as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exactly as possible (see Fig. 36).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The preceding examples suffice to give an idea of Hélène’s Hindoo, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is time to conclude.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It apparently does not belong to any actually existing dialect. M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Glardon declares that it is neither ancient nor modern Hindustani, and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after having put forth at the beginning, by way of simple hypothesis,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the idea that it might be Tamil, or Mahratta, he now sees in it a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_mélange_ of real terms, probably Sanscrit and invented words. M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Michel, likewise, is of the opinion that the grotesque jargon of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Simandini contains fragments of Sanscrit quite well adapted to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,situation. All my correspondents are, on the whole, of exactly the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,view, and I could not better sum up their opinion than by quoting the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words of M. de Saussure:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“As to the question of ascertaining whether all this really represents
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit, it is evidently necessary to answer, _No_. One can only say:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“First: That it is a medley of syllables, in the midst of which there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are, incontestably, some series of eight to ten syllables, constituting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a fragment of a sentence which has a meaning (especially exclamatory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phrases—_e. g._, =mama priya=, _mon bien-aimé_ (“my well-beloved”);
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=mama soukha=, _mes délices_ (“my delight”)).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Secondly: That the other syllables, of unintelligible aspect, never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have an anti-Sanscrit character— _i. e._, do not present groups
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,materially contrary or in opposition to the general figure of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit words.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Thirdly and finally: That the value of this latter observation is, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, quite considerably diminished by the fact that Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith seldom launches out into complicated forms of syllables, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,greatly affects the vowel _a_; but Sanscrit is a language in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proportion of the _a_’s to the other vowels is almost four to one, so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that in uttering three or four syllables in _a_, one could hardly avoid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vaguely encountering a Sanscrit word.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It follows from this last remark of M. de Saussure that it ought not to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be very difficult to fabricate Sanscrit after the mode of Simandini, if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only one is possessed of some veritable elements which can serve as a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,model and give tone to the remainder. And there is no need to know very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much of it, either, as M. Barth remarks:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Has Mlle. Smith been in communication with any person from whom she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could have taken some scraps of Sanscrit and of history? That would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suffice, in this case, for the original germ, even though it were but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slight. Imagination would do the rest. Children are very frequently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_onomatopoioi_”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But it is, naturally, Mlle. Smith herself who furnishes us, in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,own Martian, the fact most likely to throw light upon her Hindoo.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It evidently is not difficult for a subconscious activity capable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of manufacturing a language out of whole cloth to make another by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imitation and by spinning out some real data. Also, as to the beginning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the Martian (a year later, as we have seen, to that of the Hindoo),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. de Saussure does not hesitate to make this comparison, and explains,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_e.g._, the initial Sanscritoid text, the famous phrase of benediction,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,=atiêyâ ganapatinâmâ=, by the same process of fabrication which shone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forth in the words of Esenale or Astané.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I am not convinced that the general process of replacing word for word
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the French terms by terms of Oriental aspect, which is certainly the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,process employed in the fabrication of the Martian, has been made use
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of in the case of Hélène’s Oriental words. Leopold, who has laid so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much stress on procuring us a _quasi_-magical means of obtaining the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,literal translation of the Martian, has never condescended to do the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same thing for the Hindoo, but has confined himself to outlining for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us some free and vague interpretations, which scarcely add anything to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that which the pantomime permits us to divine. This leads us to think
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that an entire precise translation of the Hindoo is impossible—in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other terms, that Hélène does not fabricate her _pseudo_-Sanscrit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by following step by step a French plot, and by maintaining in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,neologisms the meaning which has been once adopted, but that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,improvises and leaves the result to chance, without reflection (with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the exception of some words of true Sanscrit, the meaning of which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knows and which she applies intelligently to the situation).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is not, then, to the Martian texts proper, in my opinion, that we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must compare Hélène’s Hindoo, but to that _pseudo_-Martian jargon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoken with volubility in certain seances, and which have never been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,noted with certainty nor translated by Esenale.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is understood, too, that while Hélène’s subliminal self can safely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,give itself up to the creation of a definite language in the freedom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the planet Mars affords, where there is no pre-existing system
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be conformed to nor any objective control to fear, it would be very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imprudent and absurd to repeat the process in connection with India:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the few words of pure Sanscrit which were at its disposal kept it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from inventing others, the falseness of which would be evident at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first attempt at a literal and _verbatim_ translation. It, therefore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contented itself with these veridical elements, insufficient in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves alone for the construction of complete sentences, being a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,jargon devoid of meaning, but in harmony through their dominant vowels
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the authentic fragments.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Now how could these authentic fragments have come into the possession
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith, who has no recollection whatever (nor has her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,family) of ever having studied Sanscrit, or of having ever been in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communication with Oriental scholars? This is the problem which my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,researches have encountered hitherto, and as a solution of which I can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,think of nothing more likely than that of a fortunate chance, analogous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to that which enabled me to discover the passage of De Marlès. I am,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for the time being, reduced to vague conjectures as to the extent of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith’s latent knowledge of Sanscrit, and the probable nature of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its manner of acquisition.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I had long thought that Hélène might have absorbed her Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,principally by _auditive_ means, and that she had, perhaps, in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,infancy lived in the same house with some Indian student, whom she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard, across the street or through an open window, speaking aloud
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit texts with their French translation. The story of the young
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,domestic without education is well known, who, seized with a fever,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoke both Greek and Hebrew, which had been stored up in her mind,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown to her, while she was in the service of a German savant. _Se
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,non è vero è ben trovato._ In spite of the just criticisms of Mr. Lang,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apropos of its poorly established authenticity, this standard anecdote
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,may be considered as a type of many other facts of the same kind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which have since been actually observed, and as a salutary warning to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distrust subconscious memories of auditive origin. But Indian scholars
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are rare in Geneva, and this trail has yielded me nothing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I am really inclined to admit the exclusively _visual_ origin of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s Sanscrit. First, it is not necessary for her to have heard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that idiom. Reading of texts printed in French characters coincides
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very well with a pronunciation so confused and badly articulated as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hers; and, further, it alone can account for certain inexplicable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,errors of pronunciation if Mlle. Smith had acquired that language by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ear.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The most characteristic of her errors is the presence in Hindoo of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French sound _u_, which does not exist in Sanscrit, but is naturally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggested by reading if it has not been previously ascertained that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that letter is pronounced _ou_ in the Sanscrit words in which it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appears.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Other observations militate in favor of the same supposition. Never in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seances has Simandini ventured _to write_ Sanscrit, and it is in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,French letters that her name was given (see p. 288).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 37. Fragment. Final sentence of a letter of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Smith, finished (or rather remaining unfinished), during the irruption
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of a spontaneous access of Hindoo somnambulism. Note foreign words,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, _boulboul_ (Persian name for nightingale), _Kana_ (Hindoo slave of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Simandini), and _radyiva_ (Sanscrit name for blue lotus); also the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Sanscrit letters _a_, _e_, _i_, _d_, _r_, taking the place of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, French initials. Note also the change of form of the _t_’s.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Still, Hélène subconsciously possesses a part, at least, of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Devanagari alphabet, since sometimes certain characters belonging to it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slip into her normal writing. But it is to be noted that her knowledge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this kind does not seem in any way to go beyond that which might
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have resulted from a rapid glance at a Sanscrit grammar.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In certain cases this irruption of foreign signs (altogether analogous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to that which has been seen in the case of the Martian) is connected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with an access of spontaneous somnambulism and makes part of a whole
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,troop of images and of Oriental terms.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,An interesting example is found in Fig. 37, which reproduces the end
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a letter which Hélène wrote me from the country. All the rest of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this six-page letter is perfectly normal, both as to handwriting and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,content, but suddenly, tired by her effort of prolonged attention, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,begins to speak of her health, sleep overcomes her, and the last lines
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,show the invasion of the Oriental dream.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Kana, the slave, with his tame birds, and the brilliant plants of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tropics, substitute themselves little by little for the actual room.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The letter reached me unfinished and without signature, as is shown in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Fig. 37; Hélène closed it mechanically during her somnambulism, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowledge of this unusual termination, at which she was surprised and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,annoyed when I showed it to her later.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Examination and comparison of all these graphomotor automatisms show
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that there are in Hélène’s subconsciousness some positive notions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,albeit superficial and rudimentary, of the Sanscrit alphabet. She knows
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the exact form of many isolated characters, and their general value,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the abstract, as it were, but she does not seem to have any idea of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their concrete use in connection with other letters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a word, these fragments of graphic automatisms betray a knowledge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hindoo writing such as a curious mind might be able to acquire by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perusing for some moments the first two or three pages of a Sanscrit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grammar. It would retain certain detached forms; first, the _a_ and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the _e_, which, striking the eye at the commencement of the two first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lines (containing the vowels, and usually separated from the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lines containing the consonants) of the standard arrangement of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hindoo letters in ten groups; then the series of ciphers, occupying a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,line by themselves and easy to retain; finally, some other simple signs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gleaned at hazard; but there will probably not be retained any of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,too complicated figures resulting from the union of several characters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in order to form words. This supposed genesis entirely corresponds with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the extent of the notions as to Sanscrit writing of which Mlle. Smith’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subconsciousness gives evidence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It will suffice in summing up, to account for Mlle. Smith’s Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,language, that perhaps in the N. group, or in some other spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment of which I am ignorant, some one, for the sake of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curiosity, may have shown her and allowed her to glance over a Sanscrit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grammar or lexicon, immediately after a seance, during that state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suggestibility in which the exterior suggestions are registered very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strongly in her case, often without leaving traces in her conscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory. The fact will also be explained that Hélène has no memory
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whatever of it, is absolutely convinced that she never saw or heard the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,least fragment of Sanscrit or any other Oriental language.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 38. Examples of Sanscrit characters, automatically
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, substituted for French words and ciphers, in words and figures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, appearing in the normal writings of Mlle. Smith (_la_me, _ru_bis,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, 1_6_6, _pli_s, 2_86_5, 15_4_). Natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I ought also to add that the information which I have up to the present
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time been able to gather has furnished me with no positive indication
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the truth of my supposition, while, on the other hand, it has not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tended to establish its falsity.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,V. THE SOURCES OF THE HINDOO DREAM
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This paragraph will have no meaning whatever for those who hold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Oriental cycle to be in reality the reappearance in Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith’s somnambulistic states, of memories belonging to an anterior
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existence in which she was an Asiatic princess, and I myself naik of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Tchandraguiri, Professor Seippel, an Arab slave, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I shall confine myself in this case to an expression of regret that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chance which has united us afresh, after five centuries of separation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,did not leave us in the midst of those tropical splendors instead of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,transporting us to the banks of the Rhône just where the fog is densest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in winter. It is a severe punishment for our past misdeeds. But when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one pushes his skepticism so far as only to see in the entire Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dream a fantastic product elaborated out of certain scattered facts,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as I have done in the preceding paragraphs, one is likewise punished
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for his want of faith by the obscure problems which are met with on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the subject of the sources of this dream. I would say also that it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficult to understand why the hypnoid imagination of Mlle. Smith gave
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself up to such pranks, and distributed as it did the rôles of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comedy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is easy to understand how a nature given to subconscious reveries,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and such as I have described in the first chapters of this book, has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,taken pleasure in the fiction of the tragic destiny of Simandini, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also that she felt specially attracted towards the career of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But M. Seippel, whom I quoted above, has nothing about him of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Arab, and still less of the slave, neither in outward appearance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nor in character; and as to myself, let us say here, M. F.—if I may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be permitted to substitute harmless initials for the always odious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I”—as for M. F., there is generally to be met with in him, under some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,diffidence, a certain mildness of manner and disposition, which would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scarcely seem to predestinate him to the energetic and wild rôle of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,violent, whimsical, capricious, and jealous Oriental despot.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to the psychological origins of the Hindoo dream—considered not so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much in its Oriental decoration, but in its essential note, which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the relation of Simandini to Sivrouka (the pretended anteriority of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. F.)—two hypotheses can be framed, between which it is difficult to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,choose.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First. From the point of view of psychopathology I should be tempted to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cause this entire somnambulistic romance to be included in that which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Freud calls _Abwehrpsychosen_, resulting from a sort of autotomy which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,frees the normal self from an affective idea incompatible with it;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which idea revenges itself by occasioning very diverse perturbations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,according to the subjects, from disorders of innervation, coming to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disturb the daily life (hysteria by somatic conversion of the affective
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coefficient of the repulsed idea), up to the case in which the self
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only escapes the intolerable contradiction between the given reality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the idea which besets it by plunging itself entirely into the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latter (mental hallucinatory confusion, delirium, etc.).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Between these varied results may be found that in which the idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,excluded from the consciousness becomes the germ of hypnoid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,developments, the point of departure of a secondary consciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown to the ordinary personality, the centre of a somnambulistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life in which the tendencies which the normal self has driven far away
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from it may take refuge and give themselves free play.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This is, perhaps, the happiest solution, from a practical and social
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,point of view, since it leaves the individual in a state of perfect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equilibrium and free from nervous troubles, outside of the very limited
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moments in which the underlying processes break out in accesses of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Such may be the case of the Hindoo dream and the origin of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attributing of the rôle of Sivrouka to M. F. Nothing, assuredly, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the normal life or being of Mlle. Smith would cause the suspicion that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she had ever consciously felt towards the latter the absurd sentiments
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which good sense would have condemned in advance; but divers hints of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her subliminal life, independently of the Hindoo cycle itself (certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dreams, etc.), have sometimes seemed to betray a latent conflict,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the sane and reasonable self would have quickly gotten rid of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the banishment from the ordinary personality of the affective
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idea, inadmissible in the given conditions of reality. Hence, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a temperament accustomed to mediumistic doubling of personality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and imbued with spiritistic doctrines, the birth and development,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,underneath the level of the normal consciousness, of this romance of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,former existence, in which emotional tendencies incompatible with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present life have found on occasion a sort of theoretic justification
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a free field for expansion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: It may also be presumed, and I prefer to admit, that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentiments of Simandini towards her fictitious rajah, far from being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the reflection and somnambulic transposition of an impression really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,felt by Mlle. Smith in regard to some one real and determined, are only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a fantastic creation—like the passion with which juvenile imaginations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are sometimes inflamed for an ideal and abstract type while awaiting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the meeting with a concrete realization more or less like it—and that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the assimilation of Sivrouka to M. F. is only a coincidence due to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the simple chance of Mlle. Smith having made the acquaintance of M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,F. at the time when the Hindoo dream was about to begin. Two points
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strengthen this hypothesis of a contingent and superficial confusion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between M. F. and Sivrouka. First, the Hindoo dream was evidently begun
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by a characteristic vision in which Simandini appeared, almost two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,months before the admission of M. F. to the seances (see pp. 279-281).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Instead of supposing that the subconsciousness of Mlle. Smith foresaw
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,already the probable arrival of this new spectator, and reserved for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him in advance a leading rôle in the romance of former existence which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she was in process of elaborating (which is not altogether impossible,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is true), it hardly seems as though M. F. could have stood for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anything in the dream-personage of Sivrouka. In the second place,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is only in the light somnambulisms and her mixed or crepuscular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,states that Mlle. Smith happens to take M. F. for the Hindoo prince
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and to seat herself at his feet in attitudes of tenderness and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,abandon (without otherwise ever departing from the bounds of perfect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,propriety); as soon as the trance becomes profound and the Hindoo
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism complete, M. F. ceases to exist for her, as well as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,others present, and she then is concerned only with an absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucinatory Sivrouka. This is the place to state that Hélène has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never presented any phenomenon similar to—far from it—certain cases in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which have been seen the awakening in the hypnotic subject of gross
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and more or less bestial tendencies, for which the subjects would have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blushed in their waking state. There is nothing of that nature in Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith. Somnambulism does not detract in any way from the elevation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her moral sense. The same is true of her deepest trances or when she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“incarnates” personages very different from her ordinary character—she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never departs from that real dignity which is a trait of her normal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To sum up—the hypothesis of a purely accidental identification, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kind of association by simple contiguity between the Hindoo prince
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and M. F., seems to me, on the whole, the most natural. It releases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the latter, besides, from all responsibility (altogether involuntary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,however) for the sentiments so profound, so disinterested, so worthy of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a less tragic fate, which the imaginary personage of Sivrouka Nayaka
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inspires in the poor Princess Simandini.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER IX
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                            THE ROYAL CYCLE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If I were obliged to give this cycle a place proportioned to that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which it occupies in the somambulic life of Mlle. Smith, a hundred
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pages would not suffice. But permit me to pass rapidly over facts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning which I should only be obliged to repeat the greater part of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the observations called forth by the preceding romances, which apply
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equally well, _mutatis mutandis_, to the personification of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette by Hélène.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The choice of this rôle is naturally explained by the innate tastes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith for everything that is noble, distinguished, elevated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,above the level of the common herd, and by the fact that some exterior
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circumstance fixed her hypnoid attention upon the illustrious queen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of France in preference to the many other historic figures equally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,qualified to serve as a point of attachment for her subconscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,megalomaniac reveries.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In default of absolutely certain information on this point, I strongly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suspect the engraving from the _Memoirs of a Physician_, representing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the dramatic scene of the decanter between Balsamo and the Dauphiness,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of having given birth to this identification of Hélène with Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette, as well as to that of her secondary personality of Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with Cagliostro.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We have, in fact, seen that this engraving (pp. 94-95), so well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,calculated to impress the imagination, was shown to Mlle. Smith by Mme.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,B. at the end of a seance—that is, at a moment when one is never sure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Hélène’s return to her normal state is complete, and in which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her hypnoid personality, still on a level with consciousness, so to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speak, is very prone to absorb the interesting suggestions which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment may furnish. It was several months—a year and a quarter,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possibly—after this incident (the precise date of which, in 1892 or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1893, it is impossible to determine) that announcement was made by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table, on the 30th of January, 1894, that Hélène was the reincarnation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Marie Antoinette. It is to be recollected that in the interval she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had for some time believed herself to be the reincarnation of Lorenza
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Feliciani; it is, however, to be noted that these two successive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,identifications did not have the same guarantee or psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signification. In fact, it was Mlle. Smith, in the waking states—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is, in her normal personality—who accepted the supposition of Mme. B.,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that she was the reincarnation of Lorenza; but the table—_i.e._, her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subconsciousness—always remained silent on this point. On the contrary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the idea of having been Marie Antoinette does not seem to have occurred
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to Hélène’s ordinary consciousness up to the time at which Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revealed this secret, by the table. If any conclusion may be drawn from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this, it is that, under the multiple suggestions of the engraving from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Dumas’ works and the suppositions of Mme. B., the hypnoid imagination
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith at first preferred to the rôle of Lorenza that of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette, which is undoubtedly more flattering and more conformable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to Hélène’s temperament, and then elaborated and matured it, very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slowly, it is true, but not excessively so, in comparison with other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,examples of subliminal incubations of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From the point of view of its psychological forms of manifestation, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Royal cycle from that time followed an evolution analogous to that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its congeners described in the preceding chapters. After some months,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during which it unfolded itself in visions described by Hélène and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accompanied by typtological explanations dictated by the table, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trance became more profound. Mlle. Smith began to personate the queen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in pantomime, of which Leopold gave the exact signification by digital
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indications. Speech was added the year following, at a date which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cannot fix, but the first occasion on which I was a witness to it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the 13th of October, 1895. Handwriting only made its appearance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as far as I am aware, two years later (November 1, 1897, see Fig.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,39), when the royal incarnation attained its apogee and Hélène was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the habit of retaining in memory the somnambulistic rôle of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette for several hours. Since then the rôle has maintained itself
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at a very remarkable level of perfection, but it scarcely seems to me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,progressing, and seems likely to become stereotyped. The objectivity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the general type of queen must be distinguished in this brilliant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality, or at least that of a lady of great distinction, as well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as a realization of the individual characteristics of Marie Antoinette
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Austria. As to the first point there is almost nothing left to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,desired. Mlle. Smith seems by nature to possess all that this rôle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,demands, and hypnoid autosuggestion finds no lack of material upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which to work.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 39. First known example of automatic irruption of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the orthography and handwriting called that of Marie Antoinette among
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the normal writings of Mlle. Smith. Fragments of a letter of Hélène of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, November 1, 1897, narrating a seance during which she had successfully
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, incarnated the queen of France and the Hindoo princess. [Collection of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, M. Lemaître.] See also p. ]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When the royal trance is complete no one can fail to note the grace,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,elegance, distinction, majesty sometimes, which shine forth in Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,every attitude and gesture.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,She has verily the bearing of a queen. The more delicate shades of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,expression, a charming amiability, condescending hauteur, pity,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indifference, overpowering scorn flit successively over her countenance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and are manifested in her bearing, to the filing by of the courtiers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who people her dream. The play of her hands with her real handkerchief
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and its fictitious accessories, the fan, the binocle with long handle,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the scent-bottle which she carries in a pocket in her girdle; her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,courtesyings, the movement, full of grace and ease, by which she never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forgets at each turning around, to throw back her imaginary train;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,everything of this kind, which cannot be described, is perfect in its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ease and naturalness. Special personification of the unhappy Austrian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wife of Louis XVI. is of a less evident, and moreover doubtful,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accuracy. To judge of it from the only objective point of comparison
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at our disposal, the handwriting (see Figs. 39 to 41), the Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette of Hélène’s somnambulisms little resembles her supposed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prototype, for there is less of difference between the autographs of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Cagliostro and of Leopold (see p. 109) than there is between that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the real queen and that of her pretended reincarnation in Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the latter having a rounded, inclined calligraphy, much more regular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than in her normal state, instead of the angular and illegible writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which was characteristic of the queen of France, to say nothing of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,glaring differences in formation of many letters. Some orthographic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,analogies (Hélène writes _instans_, _enfans_, _étois_, etc.) have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing specific about them, and simply recall the general habits of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the last century (see p. 112).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 40. Writing of Mlle. Smith incarnating Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Antoinette. Seance of November 7, 1897. Beginning of a letter, written
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in ink and addressed to Philippe d’Orléans (M. Aug. de Morsier, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, was not present at the seance). After the ink-stains of the last line,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Hélène threw down her pencil, then began again and finished her letter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in pencil in a still more regular and slanting hand than the above.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 41. Writing and signature of Marie Antoinette.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Fragment of a letter written from the Temple to General de Jarnayes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, and reproduced in the _Isographie des Hommes célèbres_. [Collection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of fac-similes published under the direction of Duchesne, Sr., Paris,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, 1827-30.]]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Not having discovered any indication as to Marie Antoinette’s manner
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of speaking, I do not know whether the hypnoid imagination of Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has succeeded better than with the handwriting in adopting in her royal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incarnations certain intonations and a pronunciation which have nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of German in them, and would rather recall the English accent. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,timbre of her voice does not change, but her speech becomes trailing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with a slight rolling of the _r_’s, and takes on something precise
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and affected, very pretty, but slightly irritating by its length. We
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,already know that there is not an absolute wall of separation between
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s various trances. Just as is the case with the Martian and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Hindoo, the handwriting or the spelling of the queen sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slips into the correspondence of Mlle. Smith (see Fig. 39), and she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also sometimes assumes the accent of Marie Antoinette, if not in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordinary waking state (I do not know whether that is ever the case), at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,least outside her Royal cycle, especially in the phases of transition
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in which she begins or ends by incarnating Leopold, the Martians, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(see, for example, p. 56).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From the point of view of its content, the Royal cycle forms a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,collection of scenes and varied tableaux, like the Martian dream,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lacking any continuous plot, and in which marked historic events
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scarcely hold a place—_e. g._, in it the queen is never seen to mount
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the scaffold as Simandini ascends her funeral pile. One does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always even know whether the spectacle before our eyes is supposed to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be the repetition, the exact recollection, of unknown but real episodes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the life of Marie Antoinette, or indeed whether it has to do with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,new, actual incidents passing now between the reincarnated queen and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her old acquaintances whom she discovers in the persons present at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seance or in the disincarnate spirits in mediumistic relationship
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with her. That depends on the case—_e. g._, on the 25th of December,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1896, Mlle. Smith, entranced, addresses touching exhortations to a lady
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present whom she took for the Princess Lamballe, which, according to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, is a reproduction of the last evening which the unhappy queen,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sustained by her companion in captivity, passed in this world. (It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,true that at Christmas, 1792, the princess had already, three months
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,previously, fallen a victim to the massacres of September.) Again
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Abbé Grégoire dictates by the table, which bows significantly to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, “_I desired to save you, but I was not able_”; or the sinister
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hébert says to her by the same process, “_I was the cause of your
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,death.... I suffer; pray for me._” Ought we to consider real the homage
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the posthumous remorse which these two disincarnate spirits bring
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after the lapse of a century to their sovereign, finally recognized in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the person of Mlle. Smith?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Generally it is impossible to decide whether the incident transpiring
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pretends simply to republish the past or constitutes a new fact.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The location of the royal scenes and visions is often undetermined.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Many are located in the gardens or the apartments of the Petit Trianon,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the furniture which Hélène describes there is, indeed, always pure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Louis XVI. More rarely Marie Antoinette is found at the Temple, or at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain rendezvous—innocent, but very imprudent—in some secret abode in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Paris. She is never seen in Austria, since, unlike the Hindoo princess
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,still filled with her Arab memories, she seems to have completely lost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sight of her past as a young girl.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the surroundings of the queen, the king is conspicuous by his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absence; very rarely she makes some allusions to him with a marked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indifference. The greater part of the personages known to that epoch,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whom I refrain from enumerating, figure in it incidentally, but there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are three who continually reappear and hold the first rank. There
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is, first, the Count of Cagliostro, “_mon sorcier_,” or “_ce cher
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sorcier_,” as the queen familiarly calls him, who never has enough of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his visits and his conversations, which are very varied, including
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the discussion of philosophic subjects, such as the future life and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the existence of God as well as the gossip of the last _fête_ at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Versailles. There is, secondly, Louis Philippe d’Orléans (Equality);
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while the third is the old Marquis de Mirabeau; all of whom, especially
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first, have served as hallucinatory interlocutors towards Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in numerous scenes—up to the time at which, to the great amusement of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the sitters, the somnambulistic monologue was transformed into real
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and lively conversation, in consequence of the introduction into the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances of M. Eugène Demole, then of M. Aug. de Morsier, in whom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Marie Antoinette immediately recognized the two personages last above
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mentioned.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Since this unexpected meeting with her two contemporaries,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reincarnated, like herself, the somnambulistic queen freely permits
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself, on occasion, the pleasure of renewing the little suppers and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,joyous evenings of long ago. When a seance which has lasted from four
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,o’clock until seven in the afternoon seems to have come to an end,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and Mlle. Smith, after having awakened from a long series of Hindoo,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian, and other scenes, has been invited to dine and refresh
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself before taking up her household duties, it often happens that,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceiving M. Demole or M. de Morsier among the persons present, she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives a slight start, with a change of countenance, sometimes barely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceptible, but which there is no mistaking; then, in her very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characteristic accent of Marie Antoinette, exclaims, “Oh, marquis, you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been here, and I had not noticed you before!” And then follows a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulistic vigil which may be prolonged until nearly ten o’clock in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the evening, maintained by means of the suggestive amiability of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,improvised companions in sustaining their rôles of Mirabeau or Philippe
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,d’Orléans.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They descend to the dining-room. The queen takes her place at the table
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,alongside of the marquis (or of Philippe). She has eyes and ears for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him alone, the other guests and the servants remaining shut out from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her dream. She eats and drinks only that which he sets before her, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it is no sinecure to supply the wants of this august neighbor, since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she possesses a truly royal appetite. The amount of food which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,devours and the goblets of wine which she drinks off one after another,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without suffering any inconvenience, are astounding, as in her normal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state Mlle. Smith is sobriety itself and eats very little. After dinner
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they pass into the _salon_, with many compliments and obeisances, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Marie Antoinette takes coffee. On the first occasions of this kind,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she also accepted a cigarette from Philippe and smoked it—Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never smokes in her waking state—but the remarks of the persons present
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the historical untruthfulness of this feature must have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,registered, and bore fruit, since at the following seances she did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not seem to understand the use of tobacco in that form; she accepted,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the other hand, with eagerness, a pinch of imaginary snuff, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,almost immediately brought about by autosuggestion a series of sneezes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,admirably successful.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The evening passes in most varied conversation, until, evidently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feeling fatigue, the queen becomes silent, closes her eyes, and goes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to sleep in an easy-chair. At that instant Leopold, who gives no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sign of life, and from whom no response can be obtained during the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,royal somnambulism, reappears and answers by the fingers or manifests
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself in spontaneous gestures. Hélène’s hand, _e. g._, is raised,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and makes passes on her forehead to accentuate the restorative sleep
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which is about to bring her back to her normal state. At the end of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some time—half an hour or more—she awakes without any recollection of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the evening, believing that she has not yet dined, and complaining
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of hunger and thirst, as if her stomachic sensibility participated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the amnesia and other modifications which accompany the change of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality. Nevertheless, at such times I have never seen her accept
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anything more than a couple of glasses of water, after which she feels
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wide awake.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In escorting her home, I was witness on one occasion to a return of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,royal somnambulism. She was exceedingly desirous of going to the house
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a well-known personage (whom she had perceived in her vision during
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the seance), who had been received at the court of Marie Antoinette,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and who died in Geneva in the first quarter of this century; it was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only upon arriving before the house in which he had lived, and as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she was upon the verge of entering it, that I finally succeeded in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,awakening and restoring her to herself, without memory of the incident,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and very much astonished at the unaccustomed streets in which we found
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ourselves.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is useless to give a more circumstantial narration of these dinners
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and _soirées_ of Marie Antoinette. They are very entertaining for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spectators, but lose much of their interest when related in their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entirety. Their details are exactly what might be expected of a lively
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal imagination, alert and full of verve, abundantly supplied,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on account of the illustrious queen, with notions still more easily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explicable, thanks to the intellectual atmosphere of France, than those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the Hindoo cycle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Numerous anachronisms, however, slip into them, and her Majesty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes falls into the snares which the marquis or Philippe take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a malicious pleasure in setting for her. She often escapes them when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they are too clumsy, and, with a most comical display of temper, is at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first confused, then curiously questions, or manifests uneasiness in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regard to the mental state of her interlocutors when they introduce
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the telephone, the bicycle, steamships, or the modern scientific
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vocabulary into their eighteenth-century conversation. But, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other hand, she herself employs terms still more malapropos, such as,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“to derail” (figuratively), “metre” and “centimetre,” etc. Certain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words, such as “tramway” and “photography,” have occasioned serious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conflicts. Marie Antoinette first allows the treacherous word to pass
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unnoticed, and it is evident that she perfectly understood it, but her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,own reflection, or the smile of the sitters, awakens in her the feeling
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of incompatibility; she returns to the word just used, and pretends a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sudden ignorance and astonishment in regard to it. Spiritism explains
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these blunders by accusing the Machiavelian companions of the queen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of grossly abusing the suggestibility attached to the trance state by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,jumbling her ideas and throwing her into confusion. Psychology is not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprised that the subliminal imitation, however remarkable it may be,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presents some little defects, and every one is in accord in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her thoughtless manner of expressing herself, in attributing these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anachronisms to an accidental mingling of the memories of her ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality and of the present life with those of the royal personality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revived during the somnambulism. In her rôle as queen, Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives evidence of a great deal of ingenuity. She is full of witty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repartées, which disconcert her interlocutors, the style of which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes perfectly after the manner of the epoch.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This ease and readiness of dialogue, excluding all reflective or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,calculating preparation, denote a great freedom of mind and a wonderful
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facility for improvisation. There are mixed with these, on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, some witticisms and episodes which are not at all impromptu,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but are the evident result of a preliminary elaboration in the course
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the subconscious reveries and various automatisms which the royal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,romance causes to surge up in Hélène’s ordinary life.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There are some scenes whose development or repetition can be followed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a series of seances and spontaneous visions as it passes through the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other cycles. The following is one example among many:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At the end of a seance at which M. de Morsier was present (October 10,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1897), Mlle. Smith enters into her dream of Marie Antoinette. During
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dinner she makes several allusions to her son, the Dauphin, speaks of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her daughter, tells of having demanded of her sorcerer the sex of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,next child, etc.—matters all foreign to the conversation of Philippe,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and which seem to announce some underlying scene ready to break forth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In fact, in the middle of the _soirée_ the queen becomes absorbed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and distrait, and finally falls on her knees in a dark corner of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_salon_; her monologue indicates that she is before the cradle where
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the little Dauphin and his sister are lying asleep. Presently she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,returns to seek Philippe and to conduct him to admire the sleeping
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,children, to whom, in a very soft voice, she sings an unknown nursery
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rhyme (“Sleep in peace,” etc.) of a plaintive melody analogous to that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the Hindoo chant; the tears gush from her eyes; tender kisses upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the imaginary cradle and a fervent prayer to the Virgin terminate this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extremely touching maternal scene.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Several weeks after (the 1st of December), a new romance makes its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance in a spontaneous access of visual, auditive, and graphic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatism, the recital of which Hélène sent me the following day. That
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evening, while alone with her mother, she had interrogated Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon an affair in which she was greatly interested, and had obtained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from him an answer: “As soon as his communication was ended, I saw
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,everything disturbed around me; then at my left, at a distance of about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thirty feet, a Louis XVI. _salon_, not very large, was outlined, in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,middle of which was a square piano, open. Before this piano was seated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a woman, still young, the color of whose hair I could not distinguish.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Whether it was blond or gray I could not clearly see. She played and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sang at the same time. The sounds of the piano, the voice even, reached
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me, but I could not catch the words of the song. A young girl and a boy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stood on either side of the piano. Not far from them was seated a young
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lady holding an infant on her lap.[27] This charming vision lasted a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very short time, not longer than ten minutes.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,After the disappearance of the vision, Hélène had the idea of taking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up her pencil. “With pencil in hand, I was asking myself what I should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,write, when all at once I heard again the melody; then, this time very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinctly, the words, but without any vision. The whole passed into my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,head, into my brain, and instinctively I pressed my hand to my forehead
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in order to hear and understand better. I felt myself compelled to hold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the pencil in a manner different from my habitual way of holding it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here are the words of the song heard and traced at that instant. As you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,see, the handwriting is not like mine; there are also some very glaring
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,errors of orthography.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, “Approchez-vous approchez-vous | enfans chéris approchez-vous | quand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, le printemps sur nous ramène | ses frais parfums ses rayons d’or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, | venez enfans sous son haleine | gazouiller bas mes doux trésors
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, | approchez-vous approchez-vous | enfans chéris approchez-vous |
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, êtres chéris enfans bénis—approchez-vous de votre mère | son doux
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, baiser petits amis | calme et guérit toutes misères | approchez-vous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, approchez-vous | enfans chéris approchez-vous.”[28]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Some months later the two preceding scenes were reproduced, with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,variations of detail, on the same evening, during which Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette first conducts Philippe towards the fictitious cradle of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cherubs and sings to them her first song: “Sleep in peace,” etc. Then
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she leads him to the piano, and, displaying an imaginary sheet of music
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beneath his eyes, obliges him to accompany her while she sings the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Song of Elizabeth.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. de Morsier, who, fortunately, is not easily embarrassed, improvised
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an accompaniment to which the queen accommodated herself after some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,criticism, and to which she sings in a very sweet, pure voice some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words which were found to be, word for word, identical with those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatically written by Hélène on the preceding 1st of December.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In this example is seen the mixture of preparation, of repetition,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and of impromptu, which are inferred from the varied incidents which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constitute the royal _soirées_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is probable that if it were possible to be a witness of, or if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith could remember all the spontaneous automatisms which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aid in nourishing the royal romance, nocturnal dreams, hypnagogic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions, subconscious reveries during the waking state, etc., there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would be presented interminable imaginary conversations with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marquis, Philippe, Cagliostro, and all the fictitious personages who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasionally make their appearance in the somnambulistic scenes of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Marie Antoinette.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is by this underlying and unknown work, perhaps never interrupted,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the personality of the queen of France is slowly prepared and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,elaborated, and which shines forth and displays itself with so much of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,magnificence in the _soirées_ with Philippe d’Orléans and the Marquis
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,de Mirabeau.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have stated that, except these two gentlemen, who always form
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part of the royal dream when they are present (and even sometimes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when absent), the others present at the seances are excluded. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understood that they do not pass unperceived on this account.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the same manner as in the negative hallucinations or systematic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anæsthesia of hypnotized subjects, that which seems to be not felt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is nevertheless registered; so, in like manner, it is altogether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probable that nothing of that which passes around her escapes the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fundamental individuality of Mlle. Smith. The royal personality which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occupies the foreground of the scene and finds itself in an elective
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_rapport_, limited to Philippe and the marquis, merely causes the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other personalities to be relegated to the background without breaking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their connection with the environment. There are many proofs of this.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For example, in walking, Marie Antoinette never runs against any of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the others present. The remarks and criticisms of the latter are not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lost upon her, since very frequently her conversation betrays their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,influence after some minutes. At the same time, if any one pinches her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand or tickles her ear, her lips, her nostrils, she seems anæsthetic;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,still, at the end of a few seconds she turns her head away, and if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the tickling is persisted in, she experiences a kind of agitation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accommodated to the circumstances of her dream, changes her position on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some pretext, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is manifest, in short, that the excitations to which she seems to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be insensible at the moment, far from having no effect, are stored up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and produce, by their sum total, reactions which are retarded for some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,minutes and which are intelligently adapted to the somnambulistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scene, but with an intensity much more exaggerated than diminished by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this period of latency.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Music also affects her, precipitating her out of the dream of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette into a common hypnotic state, in which she assumes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passionate attitudes, which have in them nothing of the regal, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which conform to the varied airs which follow each other upon the piano.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In her phases as Marie Antoinette, Hélène has an accent characteristic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of it; she recognizes me vaguely; she has some allochiria, a complete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,insensibility of the hands, and a large appetite; she does not know who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith is; if she is asked to give the actual date, she replies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correctly as to the month and day, but indicates a year of the last
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,century, etc. Then all at once her state changes; the royal accent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gives way to her ordinary voice, she seems wide awake, all mental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confusion has disappeared, she is perfectly clear as to persons, dates,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and circumstances, but has no memory of the state from which she has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,just emerged, and she complains of a sharp pain in her finger (where I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had pinched it while in her preceding phase). I took advantage one day
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of these alternations to offer her a pencil, and dictated to her the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentence of Fig. 42. In her normal moments she holds the pencil in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accustomed manner, between the index and middle fingers, and writes in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her usual hand; during the returns of the royal somnambulism she holds
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it between the thumb and index-finger and assumes her handwriting and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,orthography known as that of Marie Antoinette, exactly as her voice
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is invested with the accent. It is to be presumed that all her other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,functions, if one could examine them, would show parallel analogous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,variations, the changing of the personality being naturally accompanied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by connected changes not only of the memory and the sensibility, but of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,motility of the emotional disposition—in brief, of all the faculties of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the individuality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 42. Differences of handwriting of Mlle. Smith at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, the end of an incarnation of Marie Antoinette, according to whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, she is in her normal state (upper lines, in her usual handwriting), or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in a return of the royal dream (lower lines; note the word _foisoit_).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Natural size. The tremor of some of the strokes is not in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, original, but occurred in the reproduction in ink.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I must add that in each of her states Hélène has the memory of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preceding periods of the same kind, but not of another state: it was,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for example, necessary to dictate anew, for the second test, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentence of Fig. 42, which she did not remember having heard or written
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a few minutes previously. This separation into distinct memories is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not, however, absolute, nor very profound: the personality of Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette is, in short, a modification—of an intensity and extent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which vary greatly with the seances—of the ordinary personality of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith, rather than an alternating and exclusive personality, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which so many striking cases have been observed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For the mere spectators, the royal somnambulism is perhaps the most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interesting of all of Hélène’s cycles, on account of the brilliancy and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,life of the rôle, the length of time during which it may be sustained,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the unexpected happenings which the presence of other real persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brings into it. It is truly a comedy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But for the lovers of the supernormal it is the least extraordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the subliminal creations of Mlle. Smith, because the general
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,environment, being in France, is so imbued with historic or legendary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories of the illustrious and unfortunate queen that there is nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surprising in the hypnoid reconstruction of a personage so well known.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Finally, the psychologist and moralist who undertakes to reflect on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inner meaning of things cannot escape the impression of sharp contrast
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as compared with reality which this sparkling romance affords.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In themselves, Mlle. Smith’s royal somnambulisms are almost always gay
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and joyous; but, considering their hidden source, in so far as they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are the ephemeral and chimerical revenge of the ideal upon the real,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of impossible dreams upon daily necessities, of impotent aspirations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon blind and crushing destiny, they assume a tragic signification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They express the sensation lived through, felt, of the bitter irony
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of things, of futile revolt, of fatality dominating the human being.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They seem to say that all happy and brilliant life is only an illusion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,soon dissipated. The daily annihilation of the dream and the desire by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,implacable and brutal reality cannot find in the hypnoid imagination
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a more adequate representation, a more perfect symbol of an emotional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tonality, than her royal majesty whose existence seemed made for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,highest peaks of happiness and of fame—and ended on the scaffold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                               CHAPTER X
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                        SUPERNORMAL APPEARANCES
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The mediumship of Mlle. Smith is full of facts supernormal in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance, and the question which offers itself for our solution is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of determining to what extent they are supernormal in reality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The title of this chapter, I must assert, is not to be understood in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,partisan sense. The term “appearances” is not used in its unfavorable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,acceptation, as meaning that they are deceptive, and that there is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing behind them. It is taken in a frank and impartial sense, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,designate simply the exterior and immediate aspect of a thing, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prejudging its real nature, in order, by the very force of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,neutrality, to provoke investigation destined to separate the true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the false, the pure gold from the dross. It is precisely this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,investigation which constitutes my present task.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A rather difficult task, for it is always risky to touch upon a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject which is an apple of discord among psychologists, and which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has even been considered the “Dreyfus case of science.” The matter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is complicated, too, in this particular case, by the absolute faith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith and her friends in the supernormal character of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena; a state of mind extremely worthy of respect, but which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not calculated to facilitate research, all desire of ordinary analysis
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and explanation being resented by them as an unjustifiable suspicion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interpreted as being an indication of invincible skepticism.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I. THE STUDY OF THE SUPERNORMAL
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The term “supernormal” has been used for some years by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,investigators of the Society for Psychical Research to take the place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the old word “supernatural,” which has become impracticable on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,account of interloping connections, which finally caused its use to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be limited to theological and philosophical environments. Mr. Meyers,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to whom the credit is due, if I am not mistaken, of coining this as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well as many other new terms used to-day in the psychical vocabulary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,applies it to every phenomenon or faculty which passes beyond ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experience, and reveals either a degree of higher evolution not yet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attained by the mass of humanity, or an order of transcendental things
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,superior to the world of sense. In these two cases one finds one’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,self, indeed, in the presence of facts which are above the normal, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which are by no means to be taken as foreign or contrary to the true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,laws of human nature (as the word “supernatural” would imply).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is to be observed that the definition of Mr. Meyers lays stress
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon the character of superiority of supernormal phenomena. I shall,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,however, separate this character from it in the present chapter, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in spite of the etymology, and for lack of any better term, shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simply use the word “supernormal” to designate facts which come within
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the actual framework of the science of to-day, and the application of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which would necessitate principles not yet admitted—without occupying
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,myself, however, with endeavoring to ascertain whether these facts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are messengers of a superior economy or forerunners of a future
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evolution rather than the survival of a condition of things which has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disappeared, or whether they are purely accidental, _lusus naturae_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,denuded of signification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It goes without saying that in treating of the supernormal we must
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,admit theoretically its possibility, or—which amounts to about the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same thing—fail to believe in the infallibility and perfection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of present-day science. If I consider it, _à priori_, absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossible for an individual to know, some time before the arrival of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a telegram containing the news, of an accident by which his brother at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the antipodes has been killed, or that another can voluntarily move
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an object at a distance without having a string attached to it, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contrary to the laws of mechanics and physiology, it is clear that I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will shrug my shoulders at every mention of telepathy, and I shall not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,move a step to be present at a seance of Eusapia Paladino. What an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,excellent means of enlarging one’s horizon and of discovering something
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,new, by being satisfied with one’s ready-made science and preconceived
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opinion, quite convinced beforehand that the universe ends at the wall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opposite, and that there is nothing to be obtained beyond that which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the daily routine has accustomed us to look upon as the limit of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Real! This philosophy of the ostrich, illustrated formerly by those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grotesque monuments of erudition—over whom Galileo did not know whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to laugh or weep—who refused to put their eyes to the glass for fear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of seeing something that had no official right to existence; and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,again, that of many brains petrified by the unseasonable reading of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,works of scientific vulgarization, and the unintelligent frequenting of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,universities—these are the two great intellectual dangers of our time.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If, on the other hand, the philosophical doubt degenerates in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the presence of these scientific impossibilities into blind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,credulity; if it suffices that a thing be unheard of, upsetting,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contrary to common-sense and to accepted truths, in order to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately admitted, practical existence, without speaking of other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,considerations, becomes unbearable. The convinced occultist ought never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to allow the creaking of a piece of furniture to pass without assuring
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself that it is not the desperate call of some great-grandaunt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trying to enter into conversation with him; nor to complain to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,police when he finds his house upset during his absence—for how is he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to know that it is not some “elementals” from the world beyond who have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,done the deed? It is by the fortunate failure of consequences alone,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a continual forgetting of the doctrine, that one can continue to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,live in a universe constantly exposed to the capricious incursions of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the “invisibles.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These opposite turns of the mind—the invincible fatuity of some and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the silly superstition of others—inspire many people with an equal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repugnance. The need of a happy medium between these opposed excesses
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has been felt for some time. Here are, for example, a few lines, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have lost nothing after the lapse of two centuries:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“What are we to think of magic and witchcraft [to-day we would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,say ‘occultism’ and ‘spiritism’]? Their theory is obscure, their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,principles vague, uncertain, approaching the visionary; but—they are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,embarrassing facts, affirmed by grave men, who have seen them, or who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have heard of them from persons like themselves; to admit them all, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to deny them all, seems equally embarrassing, and I dare to assert that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in this, as in all extraordinary things which depend upon customary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rules, there is a happy medium to be found between credulous souls and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strong minds.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is the voice of reason itself that the sagacious author of _Les
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Caractères_ permits us to hear. We must, however, add that this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“happy medium to be found” would not consist in a theory, a doctrine,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a ready-made and entire system, from the height of which, as from a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tribunal of arbitration, we would judge the “embarrassing cases” which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reality places in the path of the seeker; for this system—however
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perfect it might be—would again be one more infallibility added to all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those which already encumber the road to truth. The “happy medium”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dreamed of by La Bruyère can be but a “method” always perfectible in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its application and prejudging in nothing the results of investigation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which go against the grain of the dogmatic points of view, equally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,authoritative and sterile, which characterize the two extremes of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“credulous souls” and “strong minds.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To develop here this methodology of psychical research which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,might guide the investigator struggling with the apparent or real
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal, would take me too far from Mlle. Smith. But I will briefly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicate its essence and general spirit, of which an excellent summary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,may be found in the following passage of Laplace:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“We are so far from knowing all the agents of nature and their divers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,modes of action that it would not be philosophical to deny phenomena
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,solely because they are inexplicable in the actual state of our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowledge. But we ought to examine them with an attention all the more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scrupulous as it appears more difficult to admit them.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In writing these words Laplace hardly thought of telepathy, of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirits, or the movements of objects without contact, but only of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,animal magnetism, which represented the supernormal of his time. This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passage remains none the less the rule of conduct to be followed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning all the possible manifestations of this multiform subject.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Two inseparable facts, completing each other, as the faces of a medal,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,may be distinguished in it; but it is advisable, in order to place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them the better in the light, to formulate them separately into two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,propositions representing the governing principles, the axioms of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all investigations of the supernormal. The one, which I shall call
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“PRINCIPLE OF HAMLET,” may be condensed. in these words: _All is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possible_. The other, to which it is but just to leave the name of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“PRINCIPLE OF LAPLACE,” is susceptible of many forms of expression.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I shall express it thus: _The weight of the evidence should be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proportioned to the strangeness of the facts_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The forgetfulness of the “Principle of Hamlet” makes the “strong
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,minds,” for whom the limits of nature would not exceed those of their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,system, the simpleton popes of all times and of all kinds, from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,burlesque adversaries of Galileo to the poor Auguste Comte, declaring
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the physical constitution of the stars would never be known, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to his noble rivals of the learned societies, denying the aërolites
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or condemning railroads beforehand. In its turn, the ignorance of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Principle of Laplace” makes the “credulous souls,” who have never
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reflected that, if all is possible to the eyes of the modest seeker,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all is, however, not certain, or even equally possible, and that some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidence would yet be necessary in order to suppose that a stone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,falling on the floor in an occult reunion arrived there through the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,walls by the aid of a dematerialization, rather than to admit that it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,came there in the pocket of a joker.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thanks to these axioms, the investigator will avoid the doubly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signalled danger, and will advance without fear into the labyrinth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the supernormal in advance of the monsters of the occult. However
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fantastic and magical the things may be which will spring up before
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his eyes or which will fill his ears, he will never be taken unawares,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but, expecting all in the name of the “Principle of Hamlet,” he will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not be astonished at anything, and simply say: “Be it so! Why not? We
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shall see.” On the other hand, he will not allow the wool to be pulled
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,over his eyes, and he will not easily be satisfied in the matter of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,evidence; but, firmly intrenched behind the “Principle of Laplace,” he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will show himself all the more exacting as to the proofs, in proportion
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the degree in which the phenomena or the conclusion, which they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,may wish him to accept, may be extraordinary, and he will oppose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a merciless _non liquet_ to every demonstration which still seems
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suspicious or lame.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I wish to speak a word here of the inevitable rôle which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personal coefficient of the turn of mind and character plays in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concrete application of the “Principle of Laplace.” This latter is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a vagueness and a deplorable elasticity which opens the door to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all divergences of individual appreciation. If we could express in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a precise manner and translate in ciphers, on the one hand, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_strangeness_ of a fact, which makes it improbable; on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, the _weight of evidence_ which tends to make it admissible;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and, finally, the demandable _proportion_ between these two contrary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,factors, so that the second may counterbalance the first and secure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assent—that would be perfect, and everybody would soon come to an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agreement. Unhappily, the means to accomplish this result is not yet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perceived.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We must pass now to the weight of the evidence. We may, up to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain point, submit it to an objective judgment and to an impartial
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,estimation by following the rules and methods of logic, in the broadest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sense of the term. But the strangeness of the facts, or, as Laplace
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,said, the difficulty in admitting them! Who, then, is to be the judge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of them, and by what universal standard can we measure them?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We must recognize that we are here in presence of an eminently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subjective and emotional factor, changeable from one individual to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,another.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is necessary to take some stand. In the matter of the supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,there are too many interior and personal factors (intellectual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,idiosyncrasies, æsthetic temperaments, moral and religious sentiments,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,metaphysical tendencies, etc.) tending to determine the quality and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intensity of the characteristic of the strangeness in the facts in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,litigation, to enable one to flatter himself upon a disinterested,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,objective, and _quasi_-scientific verdict upon their degree of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probability or improbability. It is only when, after the accumulation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of cases and evidences of similar character, a tacit agreement shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finally have been reached by those who have studied the subject, that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the problem can be said to be solved, either by the relegation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pretended supernormal phenomena to the domain of vanished illusions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and abandoned superstitions, or by the recognition of new laws and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forces in nature. The phenomena considered till then as supernatural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will cease to be so; they will form a part of established science, they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will have nothing more in them that is strange, and will be admitted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by everybody. As long as this mile-post is not reached, as long as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal phenomenon is discussed as such, there are but individual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opinions on this subject, subjective certitudes or probabilities,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,verdicts in which reality is only reflected as closely welded to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality of their authors.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Two suggestions seem to me to spring from this. First, authors who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,take it upon themselves to give their advice upon the extraordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facts coming to their knowledge ought always to begin by making their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,confession, so that the reader may the better distinguish the intimate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,factors which may have influenced them. It is true that we are not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always thoroughly acquainted with ourselves, but it would be something
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to say frankly what we believe we have discovered in ourselves as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the position involuntarily taken by us, obscure inclinations for or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against the hypothesis involved in the phenomena in question. This
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is what I shall try to do here, by confining myself to the problems
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,raised by the mediumship of Mlle. Smith, and without entering upon the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,boundless domain of “psychical research.” I shall, therefore, begin
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,each of the following paragraphs by giving my personal advice and my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subjective sentiment on the point upon which Hélène’s supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearances touch.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It seems to me, in the second place, that the only rational position
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to take, concerning the supernormal, is, if not a complete suspension
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of judgment, which is not always psychologically possible, at least
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of a wise probability, exempt from all dogmatic obstinacy. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fixed beliefs, the unshakable opinions as to the reality and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meaning of life, are certainly subjective conditions, indispensable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to all properly moral conduct, to all human existence truly worthy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this name—that is to say, all that which pretends to be above the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,animal routine of inherited instincts and social slavery. But these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,firm convictions would be absolutely misplaced on the objective
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ground of science, and consequently also that of supernormal facts,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which, though still situated outside of the scientific realm, hope
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shortly to be received within its pale. Practical necessities make
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,us but too often forget that our knowledge of the phenomenal world
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never attains absolute certitude, and as soon as one passes beyond
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the brutal facts of the senses, the best-established truths, as well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as the most thoroughly refuted propositions, do not rise above a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probability which, however great or insignificant we may suppose it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be, never equals infinity or zero. The intellectual attitude which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,common-sense prescribes in the supernormal consists, for very strong
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reasons, in never absolutely and irrevocably denying or affirming,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but provisionally and by hypothesis, as it were. Even in cases when,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after having examined everything scrupulously, one imagines he has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finally reached certitude, it must not be forgotten that this word
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is but a mode of expressing one’s self; because, in point of fact,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one does not rise above a probable opinion, and the possibility of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unsuspected error, vitiating the most apparently evident experimental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,demonstration, is never mathematically excluded.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This reserve is particularly indicated in cases of phenomena like
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those of Mlle. Smith, which often leave much to be desired concerning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accessory information, which would be necessary in order to express
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one’s self categorically on their account. My appreciation of these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena, far from pretending to an infallible and definite character,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,demands, therefore, from the start, the right of modification under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the influence of new facts which may be produced subsequently.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For the sake of clearness I shall set off again in four groups the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal appearances with which I shall have to occupy myself in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this chapter—viz., so-called physical phenomena, telepathy, lucidity,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and spirit messages. The boundaries of these three last categories are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but poorly defined and might easily be fused into one. But my division
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is but a kind of a measure of order, and not a classification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,II. PHYSICAL PHENOMENA
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This designation again covers several rather diverse categories of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange facts. I shall only speak of the two kinds of which Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith has furnished samples (and which I have never personally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,witnessed)—that is to say, “apports” and “movements of objects without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contact.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. _Apports._[29]—Besides the unknown causes presiding over their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aërial transportation, the arrival of exterior objects in a closed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,space, often coming from a considerable distance, implies, in order
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that they may pass through the walls of the room, either the subterfuge
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a fourth dimension of space, or the penetration of the matter—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is to say, the passage of the molecules or atoms of the object (its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,momentary _dematerialization_) between the molecules or atoms of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the wall. All these impediments to our vulgar conception as to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stability of matter, or, what is worse, to our geometrical intuition,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seem to me so hard to digest that I am tempted to apply to them the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words of Laplace: “There are things that are so extraordinary that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nothing can counterbalance their improbability.” This is not to declare
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as false, _à priori_, all the stories of this kind, for we know that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the true is not always the probable; but assuredly, even in the case of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the good Mr. Stainton Moses, the weight of the proof does not, in my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opinion, equal the strangeness of the facts.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,So far as concerns the _apports_ obtained at the seances of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith, they all took place in 1892-93, in the reunions of the N. group,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,where the obscurity favored the production of marvellous things in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,close relation with the visions and typtological messages.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I will cite from memory certain acoustic phenomena mentioned in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reports: The piano sounded several times under the touch of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,favorite disincarnate spirits of the group; the same happened to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,violin and to a bell; once we also heard metallic sounds that seemed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to come from a small musical box, although there was none in the room.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to the _apports_, always received with delight by the members of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the group, who are ever anxiously wishing for them and asking their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirit friends for them, they were frequent and varied enough. In
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mid-winter roses showered upon the table, handfuls of violets, pinks,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,white lilacs, etc., also green branches; among other things there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was an ivy leaf having engraved upon it in letters, as though by a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,punching-machine, the name of one of the principal disincarnate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirits at play. Again, at the tropical and Chinese visions sea-shells
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were obtained that were still shining and covered with sand, Chinese
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coins, a little vase containing water, in which there was a superb
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rose, etc. These last objects were brought in a straight line from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,extreme East by the spirits, in proof of which they had the honor of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a public presentation at a seance of La Société d’Études Psychiques
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,de Genève, and were placed upon the desk of the president, where all,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,myself included, could satisfy themselves at their leisure as to their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. _Movements of objects without contact._—The displacing, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contact and in the absence of all known mechanical processes, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,objects situated at a distance (telekinesis), is very strange. However,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it only upsets physiological notions, and does not, as is the case with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the _apports_, go as far as to overthrow our conceptions in regard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the constitution of matter or our spatial intuitions. It only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposes that the living being possesses forces acting at a distance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or the power of putting forth at intervals a species of invisible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernumerary prehensile organs, capable of handling objects, as our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hands do (ectenic forces of Thury, ectoplasms of Richet, dynamic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,members of Ochorowicz, etc.). Such are the ephemeral but visible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pseudopodes that the amœba puts forth in all directions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It may be conceived that, as the atom and the molecule are the centre
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a more or less radiating influence of extension, so the organized
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,individual, isolated cell or colony of cells, is originally in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possession of a sphere of action, where it concentrates at times its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,efforts more especially on one point, and again on others _ad libitum_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Through repetition, habit, selection, hereditary and other principles
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,loved by biologists, certain more constant lines of force would be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,differentiated in this homogeneous primordial sphere, and little by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little could give birth to motor organs. For example—our four members
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of flesh and blood, sweeping the space around us, would be but a more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,economic expedient invented by nature, a machine wrought in the course
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of better adapted evolution, to obtain at the least expense the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,useful effects as this vague primitive spherical power. Thus supplanted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or transformed, these powers would thereafter manifest themselves only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very exceptionally, in certain states, or with abnormal individuals, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an atavic reapparition of a mode of acting long ago fallen into disuse,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,because it is really very imperfect and necessitates, without any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,advantage, an expenditure of vital energy far greater than the ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,use of arms and limbs. Unless it is the cosmic power itself, the amoral
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and stupid demiurge, the unconsciousness of M. de Hartman, which comes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,directly into play upon contact with a deranged nervous system, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,realizes its disordered dreams without passing through the regular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,channels of muscular movements.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But enough of these vapory metaphysical or pseudo-biological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speculations to give an account of a phenomenon for which it will be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time enough to find precise explanation when its authenticity shall be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beyond dispute, if that time shall ever arrive.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Three groups of proofs, of a diverse nature, have gradually brought me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to look upon the reality of these phenomena—in spite of the instinctive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficulty of admitting them—as an infinitely more probable hypothesis
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than its opposite.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: I was first unsettled by the reading of the too-much-neglected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memoir of Professor Thury, which seems to me to be a model of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scientific observations, the weight of which I could only overlook by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rejecting, _à priori_—in the name of their strangeness—the possibility
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself of the facts in question, which would have been against the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Principle of Hamlet. The conversations which it was my privilege
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to hold with M. Thury have greatly contributed to arouse in me a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presumption in favor of these phenomena, which the book would evidently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not have done in the same degree if the author had not been personally
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,known to me.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: Once created, my idea of the probability of these facts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,became rather strengthened than weakened by a number of foreign works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of more recent date; but I doubt whether any, or all of these combined,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would have been sufficient to create it. The displacement of objects
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without contact being once hypothetically admitted, it seems easier to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me to explain Crookes’s observations on the modifications of the weight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of bodies in the presence of Home by authentic phenomena of this kind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(in spite of the well-deserved criticisms that Crookes’s publications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brought upon him) than to suppose that he was simply Home’s dupe. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same is true with the cases of _Esprits tapageurs_ (_Poltergeister_),
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,published by the Society for Psychical Research, the exclusive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hypothesis of the “_naughty little girl_,” without the addition of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any trace of telekinesis, which seems to me a less adequate and more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,improbable explanation than that of real phenomena, which would have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tempted fraud. Naturally all depends on the preconceived opinion one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,may have as to the general possibility or impossibility of these facts,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and my feeling in regard to the matter would certainly be different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without the preceding or the following groups of evidence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thirdly: The probability of the movement of objects without contact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has reached with me a degree practically equivalent to certitude,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thanks to M. Richet, to whom I am indebted for my presence at his house
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,last year at several seances of Eusapia Paladino, under conditions of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,control which gave no room for doubt—at least without challenging the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,combined witness of the senses of sight, hearing, and touch, as well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as the average quantity of critical sense and perspicacity with which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,every ordinary intelligence flatters itself it is endowed; or, again,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of suspecting the walls of M. Richet’s study had been tampered with,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and he himself, with his attending colleagues, of being impostors,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in collusion with the amiable Neapolitan herself—a supposition which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the most elementary sense of propriety would absolutely forbid me to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entertain. From that moment I believed in telekinesis by constraint
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the perception, _sensata et oculata certitudine_, to borrow
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the expression of Galileo, who certainly did not mean by that an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unreflecting adhesion to the evidences of the senses, like that of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,casual onlooker at the tricks of the prestidigitator, but rather the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,final crowning of an edifice having for its rational framework the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reasoned analysis of the conditions of observation, and of the concrete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circumstances surrounding the production of the phenomenon.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In saying that I believe in these facts, I will add that there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is no question here of a conviction, in the moral, religious, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,philosophical sense of the term. This belief is for me devoid of all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vital importance; it does not move any essential fibre of my being,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and I would not feel the least inclination to submit to the slightest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,martyrdom in its defence. Whether the objects move or do not move
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without contact is absolutely indifferent to me. Should any one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some day succeed in unveiling the physical tricks or the fallacious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological processes which have led into error the best observers of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telekinesis, from M. Thury down to M. Richet, with a number of other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,witnesses, myself included, I would be the first to laugh at the trick
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that art and nature had played upon me, to applaud the perspicacity of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the one who discovered it, to congratulate myself, above all, in seeing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal appearances returning to the ordinary course of things.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This is a disproportionally lengthy preamble to facts of which I shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have to speak here, for they are reduced to a few displacements of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,objects without contact (raising of tables, transporting or projecting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of flowers and diverse things placed out of reach), of which Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her mother were witnesses on several occasions at their house. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cannot be accused of stubborn skepticism, since I admit the reality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of telekinesis. In the present case, however, all the stories which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been told me leave much to be desired from an evidential point
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of view. Without suspecting in any way the perfect good faith of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,both Mme. and Mlle. Smith, it suffices to recall the possibility of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,malobservation and errors of memory in the stories of supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,events in order not to attribute a great evidential value to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absolutely sincere evidence of these ladies.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Incapacitated as I am from pronouncing judgment upon phenomena of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I was not a witness, I shall, however, put forth a fact which might
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,militate in favor of their authenticity (their possibility having
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been first hypothetically admitted)—namely, that these phenomena have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,always been produced under exceptional conditions, at a time when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène was in an abnormal state and a prey to a deep emotion. On the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,one side, this circumstance increases the chances of malobservation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,while, on the other, the day on which it shall be well established
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that (as divers observations cause us to think) certain abnormal and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotional states set at liberty in the organism latent forces capable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of acting at a distance, it will be permitted us to suppose that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perhaps something analogous has taken place in Mlle. Smith’s case. Here
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is, as an example of these perplexing cases, a fact which happened to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her during a period of general indisposition. Abridging the story, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reproduce it as Hélène sent it to me the following day:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Last night I had a visit from M. H. I do not need to give you an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,analysis of my impressions; you will understand them as well as I do.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,He came to tell me that he had held a seance with a lady who was a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stranger to me, and that this lady had seen Leopold, who had given her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a remedy for the indisposition from which I was suffering. I could not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refrain from telling him that Leopold had assured me that he manifested
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,himself only to me, and that it would consequently be difficult for me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to admit his alleged utterances to others.” But that is not the most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interesting part of the story.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“While M. H. spoke to me I felt a sharp pain in my left temple, and,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,perhaps two minutes afterwards, my eyes, constantly directed towards
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the piano, on which I had placed two oranges the evening before, were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entirely fascinated with I know not what. Then, suddenly, at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moment when we least expected it—we were all three (M. H., my father,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and myself) seated at a reasonable distance from the piano—one of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,oranges displaced itself and rolled to my feet. My father maintained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it had no doubt been placed too near the edge of the lid, and at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a certain moment had fallen in a natural way. M. H. saw immediately
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in this incident the intervention of some spirit. I myself dared not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pass my opinion on it. Finally, I picked up the orange, and we spoke of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other things.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“M. H. remained about an hour; he went away exactly at nine. I went
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to my mother’s room to give her a few details of M. H.’s visit. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,described to her the fall of the orange, and what was my surprise when,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on returning to the drawing-room and stepping up to the piano to take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the lamp I had placed on it, I found the famous orange no longer there.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There was but one left; the one I had picked up and replaced by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,side of the other had disappeared. I looked for it everywhere, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without success. I went back to my mother, and while I spoke to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we heard something fall in the vestibule. I took the lamp to see what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,might have fallen. I distinguished at the farthest end (towards the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,door of the entrance to the apartment) the much-sought-for orange!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Then I asked myself quite frankly whether I was in presence of some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritistic manifestation. I tried not to be frightened. I took the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,orange to show it to my mother. I returned to the piano to take the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,second orange, so as not to be frightened in a similar way. But it,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in its turn, had disappeared! Then I felt a considerable sensation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trembling. I returned to my mother’s room, and, while we discussed the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,matter, we heard again something thrown with violence, and, rushing out
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to see what had happened, I saw the second orange placed in exactly the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same spot where the other had been, and considerably bruised. Imagine
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,how astonished we were! I took both oranges, and, without losing an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,instant, went to the kitchen and put them in a cupboard, where I found
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them again the following morning; they had not moved. I did not go to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bed without some fear, but fortunately I quickly went to sleep. My
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mother is sure that it is M. H. who brought some evil spirit into the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,house, and she is quite uneasy....”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,From the oral explanations of Mlle. Smith and her mother, and also
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the location of the places, it follows that the oranges had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been thrown at a distance of ten yards from the piano, through the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wide-open parlor door leading to the vestibule, against the door of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apartment, as if to follow and strike fictitiously M. H., who a few
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,moments before had left by this door.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One has undoubtedly always the right of discarding at the outset, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presenting too little guarantee of genuineness, the extraordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stories of a person subject to hallucinations. In the present case, all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that I know of Mlle. Smith and her parents keeps me from doing so, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persuades me that her story is thoroughly exact, which, however, does
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not amount to saying that there is anything of the supernormal about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it. One has, in fact, the choice between two interpretations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: In the hypothesis of veritable telekinesis, the following is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the manner in which the adventure would be summed up: the emotion due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the unexpected and unpleasant visit of M. H. had brought about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a division of consciousness. The feeling of irritation, anger, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repulsion against him had condensed themselves into some secondary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personality, which, in the general perturbation of the entire
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychophysiological organism, had momentarily recovered the use of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these primitive forces of action at a distance, entirely removed from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the will, and without the participation of the ordinary self, and thus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,automatically accomplished outwardly the instinctive idea of bombarding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this ill-bred visitor. Notice is to be taken of the painful _aura_ at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the temple and the fascination of gaze, which, according to Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,story, preceded the first signs of the phenomenon, the orange falling
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and rolling at her feet.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: But the most natural supposition is certainly that Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith, by the ordinary use of her limbs, had taken and thrown these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,projectiles in an access of unconscious muscular automatism. It is true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that this would not agree with the presence of her father, mother,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or M. H., who did not see her make the supposed movements. But an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absent-mindedness of even normal witnesses will seem easier to admit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than the authentic production of a supernormal phenomenon.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These episodes which have happened to Mlle. Smith and her mother since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have known them are very few, amounting to half a dozen at the most,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and I will not dwell longer upon this subject. Hélène is not conscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of possessing any faculty of movement at a distance, and she always
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attributes these phenomena to spirit intervention. Leopold, on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other hand, has never acknowledged that he is the author of them. He
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,claims that Hélène possesses within herself supernormal powers, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that, in order to succeed, she would only have to set them to work,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but that she did not wish to do so. All my suggestions and repeated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entreaties with Leopold and Hélène—either awake or in a state of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulism—in the hope of obtaining in my presence some physical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomenon, have been in vain up to the present time.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,III. TELEPATHY
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One may almost say that if telepathy did not exist one would have to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,invent it. I mean by this that a direct action between living beings,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,independent of the organs of the senses, is a matter of such conformity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to all that we know of nature that it would be hard not to suppose it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_à priori_, even if we had no perceptible indication of it. How is it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possible to believe that the foci of chemical phenomena, as complex as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the nervous centres, can be in activity without giving forth diverse
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,undulations, _x_, _y_, or _z_ rays, traversing the cranium as the sun
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,traverses a pane of glass, and acting at a distance on their homologues
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in other craniums? It is a simple matter of intensity.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The gallop of a horse or the leap of a flea in Australia causes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the terrestrial globe to rebound on its opposite side to an extent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proportional to the weight of these animals compared to that of our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,planet. This is little, even without taking into account the fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that this infinitesimal displacement runs the risk at every moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of being neutralized by the leaps of horses and fleas on the other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hemisphere, so that, on the whole, the shocks to our terrestrial globe
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resulting from all that moves on its surface are too feeble to prevent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our sleeping. Perhaps it is the same with the innumerable waves which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,coming from all other living beings, shock at every moment a given
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,brain: their efforts are counterbalanced, or their resultant too
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,slight to be perceived. But they exist none the less in reality, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I confess I do not understand those who reproach telepathy with being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,strange, mystical, occult, supernormal, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to the knowledge whether this theoretical telepathy offers results
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,open to experimental demonstration—that is to say, whether this chain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of intercerebral vibrations into which we are plunged exercises any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,notable influence on the course of our psychic life; and whether, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain cases, we happen to feel emotions, impulses, hallucinations,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the psychological state of one or another of our own kind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exercises directly upon us, across the ether and without the ordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intermediary of the channel of our senses—that is a question of fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arising from observation and experience. We know how much this question
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has actually been discussed, and how difficult it is to solve it in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a decisive way, as much on account of all the sources of errors and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,illusions, to which one is exposed in this domain, as on account of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,probably always necessary concurrence of very exceptional circumstances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(which we do not as yet know how to accomplish at will), in order
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the particular action of a determined _agent_ should sweep away
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all rival influences, and betray itself in a manner sufficiently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marked and distinct in the life of the _percipient_. Everything
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,considered, I strongly lean towards the affirmative. The reality of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telepathic phenomena seems to me difficult to reject in presence of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the cluster of very diverse evidences, entirely independent of each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other, that militate in its favor. Undoubtedly none of these evidences
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is absolutely convincing when taken separately; but their striking
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convergence towards the same result gives to their entirety a new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and considerable weight, which tips the scale, in my opinion, while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,awaiting an inverse oscillation, which may some day destroy this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convergence, or explain it by a common source of error. Besides, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understand very well why those to whom telepathy remains a mystic,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and to our scientific conceptions heterogeneous, principle, should
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obstinately resist it. But, seeing nothing strange in it myself, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do not hesitate to admit it, not as an intangible dogma, but as a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,provisional hypothesis, corresponding better than any other to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,condition of my certainly very incomplete knowledge of this department
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of psychological research.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Although predisposed in favor of telepathy, I have failed in finding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,striking proofs of it in Mlle. Smith, and the few experiments I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attempted with her on this subject offered nothing encouraging.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I tried several times to make an impression upon Hélène from a distance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and to appear before her during the evening, when I thought she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,returned to her home, which is a kilometre distant from mine. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtained no satisfactory result. My only case of striking success, lost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,among a number of nonsuccesses, can be explained by mere coincidence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as well, and, after taking all the accessory circumstances into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consideration, does not deserve a lengthy discussion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to spontaneous telepathy, a few indications would make me think
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Mlle. Smith sometimes involuntarily submits to my influence. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,most curious is a dream (or a vision) that she had one night at a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time when I had suddenly fallen ill during a stay in the country some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,twenty leagues distant from Geneva. She heard the ringing of a bell at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her door, then saw me entering, so emaciated and apparently so tired
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that she could not refrain from speaking to her mother on the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,morning of her uneasiness concerning me. Unfortunately these ladies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,took no note of the exact date of this incident, and Hélène did not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speak of it to M. Lemaître until three weeks later, when he told her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about my illness, the beginning of which dated back to the approximate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time of the dream. The evidential value of this case is weak. On other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasions Mlle. Smith announced to me that, to judge from her dreams
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or vague intuition in a waking state, I was to have on a certain day
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an unexpected vexation, a painful preoccupation, etc. But the cases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in which she was right were counterbalanced by those in which she was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wrong. It does not appear that Hélène’s telepathic relations with other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persons are closer than with me, and among the cases known to me there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is not one that deserves the trouble of being related. An exception
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must, however, be made on behalf of a M. Balmès (pseudonym), who was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for some time employed in the same business house as Mlle. Smith, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning whom she had several really curious phenomena. This M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Balmès was himself “a sensitive medium” of a very nervous and vibrating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nature. He was working in the story above that of Hélène, and stopped
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sometimes to talk concerning spiritism with her. Their relations, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they did not extend beyond the office, ended there. There never seemed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to be any personal sympathy or special affinity between them, and it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not known how to account for the telepathic bond that seemed to exist
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between them. The following are examples:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. One morning M. Balmès lent a newspaper to Hélène in which there was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an article on spiritism. He himself had received this paper from one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of his friends, M. X., a Frenchman who had been in Geneva for some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three weeks only and who did not know Hélène even by name. This M. X.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had marked the interesting article in red and had added on the margin
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an annotation in black. During her noon meal at home Hélène read the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,article rapidly, but for lack of time did not read the annotation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marked in black. Having returned to her office she began again to work.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,However, at a quarter-past three her eyes fell on the annotation of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paper, and as she was taking up her pen to make some calculation in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her note-book, “I do not know,” she wrote to me, “either how or why I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,began to draw on this writing-tablet the head of a man entirely unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to me. At the same time I heard the voice of a man, of a high, clear,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and harmonious quality, but unfortunately I could not understand the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words. A great desire came over me to run and show this drawing to M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Balmès. He examined it, and seemed astonished, for the head drawn in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ink was no other than that of his friend who had lent him the paper
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marked in pencil. The voice and the French accent were, as it seems,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entirely correct also. How was it that at the sight of an annotation I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found myself in communication with a stranger? M. Balmès, in presence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this curious phenomenon, hastened that very evening to his friend
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and learned that at the time when I drew his portrait there was a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,serious discussion in progress concerning him (M. Balmès) between M. X.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and other persons.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Strictly speaking, this case may be normally explained by supposing:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First, that Mlle. Smith, without consciously noticing or remembering
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,him, had seen M. X. during his short stay in Geneva, walking in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,street with M. Balmès, and that the paper, which she knew had been lent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to M. Balmès by one of his friends, had, by means of a subconscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,induction, awakened the latent memory of the face and voice of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stranger whom she had seen with him. Secondly, that there is but a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fortuitous coincidence in the fact that M. X. spoke of M. Balmès at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,precisely the hour when Hélène traced the face and heard the voice of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the aforesaid M. X. in an access of automatism, set free at the sight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of his annotation on the paper.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the telepathic hypothesis, on the contrary, the incident would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been explained somewhat as follows: The conversation of M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,X. concerning M. Balmès (which was, as it appears, of an excited
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nature) had telepathically impressed the latter and awakened in him
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminally the remembrance of M. X. M. Balmès, in his turn, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciously suspecting it, had transmitted this remembrance to Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith, who was already predisposed to suggestion on that day by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,loan of the paper, and with whom the said remembrance broke forth into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a graphic, auditive, and impulsive (the desire of showing her drawing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to M. Balmès) automatism. The subconscious strata of M. Balmès had thus
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,served as a link between M. X. and Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. “Some eight days after the preceding case, being a few minutes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after noon in an open street-car, I saw before me this same M. Balmès
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,talking to a lady in a room apparently close to the street-car. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,picture was not very clear. A kind of mist seemed to extend over the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whole, which was, however, not strong enough to hide from me the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personages. M. Balmès, especially, was quite recognizable, and his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somewhat subdued voice made me overhear these words: ‘It is very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious, extraordinary.’ Then I felt a sudden, violent commotion, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the picture vanished at the same time. Soon I found myself again riding
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the street-car, and, according to the progress which it had made, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understood that the vision had lasted but three minutes at the most.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Notice must be taken of the fact that during these few minutes I did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not lose for a single moment the consciousness of my situation; I knew
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and felt that I was riding home, as I was in the habit of doing each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,day, and I felt entirely like myself, without the slightest mental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,disturbance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Two hours later I went up to M. Balmès. Approaching him frankly—yes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,even a little abruptly—I said to him: ‘Were you satisfied with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,short visit you made a few minutes after twelve, and would it be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indiscreet to ask what you found so _curious_, so _extraordinary_?’ He
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seemed confused, astonished, pretended even to be vexed, and looked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as if he wished to ask me by what right I permitted myself to control
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his actions. This movement of indignation passed as quickly as it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,came, to give way to a sentiment of the greatest curiosity. He made
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me tell him in detail my vision, and confessed to me that he really
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had gone at noon to call upon a lady, and that they had discussed the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incident about the newspaper. He had really pronounced the words that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I had heard: ‘It is curious, extraordinary,’ and, strange to say, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also learned that at the end of these words a violent ringing of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,bell had been heard, and that the conversation between M. Balmès and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his friend had suddenly come to an end by the arrival of a visitor.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The commotion felt by me was, therefore, nothing more than the violent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ringing of the bell, which, putting an end to the conversation, had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,also put an end to my vision.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. At the beginning of a seance one Sunday afternoon at a quarter to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,four, I handed to Hélène a glass ball, of the kind used for developing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,clairvoyance by means of gazing into a crystal. Shortly afterwards she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saw in it M. Balmès and his friend, and above their heads an isolated
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pistol, but which seemed to have nothing to do with them. She told
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me then that M. Balmès had received the day before at his office a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telegram which very much upset him, and which obliged him to leave
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Geneva that very evening for S. She seemed to apprehend some misfortune
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about to befall M. Balmès, but soon fell asleep. By his digital
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dictations Leopold tells us that he sent her to sleep to save her some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,painful visions seen in the crystal, and that she, Hélène, has a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediumistic consciousness in regard to all that is passing at S., and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the pistol is connected with M. Balmès. It was impossible to learn
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more, and the remainder of the seance was taken up with other matters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Balmès, who returned to Geneva on the following Monday, and whom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I saw the same evening, was very much struck with Hélène’s vision,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for, on Sunday afternoon he really took part in a scene which came
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,near being tragic, and in the course of which his friend X. had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,offered him a pistol which he always carried with him. Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and M. Balmès did not hesitate to see in this coincidence a highly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,characterized supernormal phenomenon. This case offers, however, some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,difficulty—viz., that the incident of the pistol at S. did not take
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,place till more than two hours after Hélène’s visions, and that M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Balmès, as he affirms, had no premonition of the affair at the time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when Hélène had her vision. It follows from this that there was a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,kind of anticipated telepathy, a premonition experienced by another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than the interested principal, and this raises the great question of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the supernormal knowledge of future events. I find it easier to admit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that, although M. Balmès did not consciously foresee the incident of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the pistol, he foresaw subconsciously the event, and that this idea
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,passed telepathically to Hélène. Perhaps this case might be explained
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without having recourse to the supernormal at all. Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knowing M. Balmès’ character, and up to a certain point his personal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,circumstances, having been present the evening before when M. Balmès
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,received the telegram, and foreseeing (as she said at the seance), the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gravity of the situation, could easily imagine the intervention of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fire-arm in the affair. Besides, no detail of the vision indicates that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the pistol seen in the glass ball corresponds to that of M. X.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,How far the delicate sense of probabilities can go, and how often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spontaneous inferences, with people of a quick imagination, are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correct, one never knows. Undoubtedly we often see a supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connection where there is, in reality, only a striking coincidence, due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to a happy divination and prevision, which is very natural. I ought
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to add that this manner of evicting the supernormal and reducing the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision of the pistol to a mere creation of the subliminal fantasy,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seems inadmissible to Hélène, who remains absolutely certain that this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was a convincing case of telepathy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The above example, 2, which is the best of all, in my opinion, is still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not irreproachable.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,IV. LUCIDITY
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,All the facts of lucidity (clairvoyance, second-sight, etc.) which are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,attributed to Mlle. Smith may be explained by telepathic impressions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proceeding from living persons. This means that I not only admit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the start the _possibility_ of such phenomena by virtue of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Principle of Hamlet,” but, since telepathy is not, in my opinion,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anything very strange, I shall feel no subjective difficulty in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accepting the reality of Hélène’s supernormal intuitions, provided
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that they present some serious guarantee of authenticity, and do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explain themselves still more simply by normal and ordinary processes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, who appears in almost all of these veridical messages—whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he recognizes himself as the author or whether he accompanies simply by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his presence their manifestation through Hélène—has never deigned to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grant me one under entirely satisfactory conditions, and he censures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my insistence as vain and puerile curiosity. As to the innumerable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena with which others more fortunate than myself have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gratified, they have always offered this singularity: when they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appeared to be really of a nature calculated to furnish a decisive and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,convincing proof as to their supernormal origin, I never succeeded in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtaining a written, precise, and circumstantial account, but only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,uncertain and incomplete tales, too intimate and too personal to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,divulged by those interested in them; and, again, when my friends were
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quite willing to write out a detailed account and to answer to my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,demand for exact information, the fact reduced itself to such a small
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,matter that it was beyond my power to see anything of the supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Taking everything into consideration, I am inclined to believe that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith, in truth, possesses real phenomena of clairvoyance, not,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,however, passing beyond the possible limits of telepathy; only, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,order that they may be produced, it is necessary that Leopold—that is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to say, the special psychic state of Hélène which is necessary for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reception and externalization of these telepathic impressions—be aided
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the outside by the influence of certain favorable temperaments,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more frequently met with among convinced spiritists than among persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who are normal, and that he be not impeded, on the other hand, by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paralyzing presence of hostile temperaments, such as that of a critical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observer. It is greatly to be regretted that the naïve believers who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inspire and succeed in obtaining magnificent phenomena of lucidity
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,usually care so little for the desiderata of science, and, above all,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,refuse to submit themselves to an examination which might explain the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena in a natural manner; while the investigators in search of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“convincing” proofs are not inspiring and obtain almost nothing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,However it may be, I shall give a few examples of Mlle. Smith’s proofs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of lucidity, which are not very varied, and can be divided into the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three categories of the medical prescriptions and diagnoses, of lost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,objects found again, and of retrocognitions of events more or less
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remote.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. _Medical Consultations._—In promising specimens of extraordinary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facts of this kind I have gone too far. Many such have been told me—as,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for instance, Leopold dictating an unknown and complicated recipe
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a hair tonic for a gentleman living abroad, a single bottle of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which was sufficient to bring forth a full growth of hair on a head
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which had become bald before middle age; or, again, Leopold, being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consulted about the health of a lady living at a great distance from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Geneva, revealing both the veridical nature of her illness, which was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unknown till then to her physicians, and its origin, which was due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to certain unsuspected but perfectly true incidents connected with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her childhood, and, finally, the treatment, which was crowned with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,success. But the absence of written testimony and precise information
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to the concomitant circumstances of these marvellous cures reduce
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them to the rank of amusing stories, the value of which cannot
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,positively be estimated. As to better-attested episodes, it is true
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have been able to obtain authentic stories, but they are those in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the probability of a supernormal element has been reduced to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,minimum—imperceptible to me. I will cite but one case.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. and Mme. G. having invited Mlle. Smith during the month of August
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to pass a day with them in the country, a few leagues distant from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Geneva, took advantage of the visit to hold a seance in order to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consult Leopold on the health of one of their children. I will tell the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,incident from a written account sent me by Mme. G. soon afterwards:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Our little girl was suffering from anæmia, and fell frequently into a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of weakness, in spite of intervals of improvement. Dr. d’Espine
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had been recommended to us for the time of our return to Geneva. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium [Mlle. Smith] knew nothing of this; we had taken the precaution
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to keep it from her.” The seance begins with a few kind words from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold, whom M. G. then asks whether he would do well in consulting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Dr. d’Espine. “_And I_,” replied Leopold, “_can I do nothing for you?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Ungrateful people!_” But when he was asked to indicate some treatment,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he replied: “_Wait till your return to Geneva._” Then, upon being asked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whether an egg mixed with brandy would be good for the child, he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,replied that the egg would be good, but the brandy was not necessary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her case. Then he recommended that the child be taken for an hour’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,walk in the open air every day. As to the prescription relating to her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,food, he repeated: “_I told you to wait till your return to Geneva._”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On their return to Geneva in the middle of September, M. and Mme. G.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,held a second seance. This time Leopold was more exact; he advised:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_Not too much milk, but rather a few glasses of good pure wine at each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meal._” Then he added: “_Treat the anæmia first and you will triumph
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,over the throat trouble, which would finally weaken her too much. Her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blood is so weak that the least cold, the slightest emotion, I will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,go so far as to say that the expectation of a pleasure even, would be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sufficient to bring the angina to a crisis. You ought to have foreseen
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that._” “Leopold,” M. G. notes here, “has enabled us to put our finger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon such of the details as we did not know how to explain. At each
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sentence my wife and I looked at each other with stupefaction.” Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ordered also many green vegetables, warm salt-water douches of three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,minutes’ duration in the evening, and: “_The principal thing now is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,five drops of iron in half a glass of water twice a day before the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meal. Do this and you will see the result in a month._” In two weeks’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time the little girl was hardly recognizable.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I have cited this case because it is among those that have most struck
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. and Mme. G., and upon which they build their conviction of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,independent existence and supernormal knowledge of Leopold, and because
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it shows how little is needed to kindle the faith among spiritists.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I forgot to say that the G. family was well known by Mlle. Smith, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that during the whole winter and the preceding spring she had held
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,weekly seances at their home. There is but one thing that astonishes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me, and that is, that Leopold, at the time of the first improvised
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consultation, should have been taken unawares up to the point of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,postponing his orders until later, and adhering to such commonplace
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,things as a walk in the open air and the suppression of brandy. In the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,second seance one sees the effect of a month’s incubation. Leopold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has had time to recover in Hélène’s memory the remembrance concerning
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the little girl who was anæmic and subject to sore throat; also the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prescription which, in the given case, surely proved most efficacious,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but which hardly denotes a supernormal knowledge. One does not even
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,need here telepathy to explain messages which are amply accounted for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the subconscious functions of Mlle. Smith’s ordinary faculties.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Examples of this kind, drawn from Mlle. Smith’s mediumship, might
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be almost indefinitely multiplied; but _cui bono_? Once more, I do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not claim that Leopold has never given any medical consultation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surpassing Hélène’s latent knowledge and implying supernormal powers
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of clairvoyance. I only say that I have not yet succeeded in finding a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,single case where the proofs reached the height of that conclusion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. _Objects Recovered._—I do not know any case in which Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has indicated the situation of an object which had been hidden, and as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the location of which she could have had no information through
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,natural channels. All her discoveries consist, so far as I have been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to judge, in the return, under a spiritistic and with a dramatic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aspect, of memories either simply forgotten or properly subliminal,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which depended upon the incidents concerned having first belonged to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the ordinary consciousness, or their having always escaped it and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having been from their origin registered in the subconsciousness.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These are facts of cryptomnesia pure and simple—_i. e._, explicable by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a normal psychological process very common in its essence, while the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,picturesque embellishments added by the mediumistic imagination give
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to these teleological automatisms a certain mysterious and supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,appearance which in other surroundings would certainly create for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène—or rather for Leopold—a place alongside St. Anthony of Padua.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I confine myself to two examples. Mlle. Smith being charged with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,duty of making ready the merchandise sent out from her department, was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handed a telegram one day from a customer who asked that four yards of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,No. 13,459 be despatched to him immediately. “This brief order,” said
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène, “was not calculated to hasten the forwarding of the goods. How
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could I readily find this No. 13,459, in the midst of six or seven
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thousand others in the store? Pondering, telegram in hand, I was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wondering how I could find it, when a voice outside of but very near me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,said to me: ‘_Not there, but here_,’ and involuntarily I turned round,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without knowing why, and my hand laid itself mechanically on a piece of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,goods which I drew towards me, and which actually bore the No. 13,459.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is not necessary to be a medium to know by experience these happy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reminiscences or inspirations which sometimes come to free us from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,embarrassment by shining forth like a light at an opportune moment;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but that which in the case of ordinary persons remains in the feeble
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,condition of an idea or internal image, among mediumistic temperaments
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assumes readily the fixed and vivid form of an hallucination. Instead
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of simply “suddenly recollecting” in the case of the No. 13,459, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would have happened to any one else, Hélène hears an exterior voice,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and perceives her hand moving involuntarily in a given direction. It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,noted that this automatism assumed an auditive and motor form which is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the pendant of the vocal and visual automatism which I have referred to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on pp. 58-59. It is to this same class of facts, well known and almost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,common to-day, that the following example likewise belongs, although
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the subliminal imagination had surrounded it with the form of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intervention on the part of Leopold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One Sunday evening, on returning home, Mlle. Smith noticed that she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had lost a small breastpin which had been fastened to her corsage, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which she greatly valued as a souvenir. The following day she returned
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to look for it where she had been the evening before, but in vain,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a notice which she caused to be inserted in the “lost” columns of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a daily newspaper gave no result. Here I leave the narration of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,story to her: “Persuaded that my pin was really lost, I did my best
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to think no more about it, but this was a difficult matter, since one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,night I was awakened suddenly by three raps struck against my bed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Somewhat frightened, I looked around, but saw nothing. I tried to go
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to sleep, but again many raps were struck, this time near my head. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seated myself on my bed (I was agitated), trying to discover what was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,happening, and hardly had I seated myself when I saw a hand shaking my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lost breastpin before my eyes. This vision lasted only a minute, but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that was long enough for it to make a deep impression upon me.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The following Tuesday evening (ten days after the loss of the trinket)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène held a seance at the house of M. Cuendet, at which two other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,persons were also present. She told of the loss of her pin and the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious vision above described; then all seated themselves at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table. After a typtological dictation upon an altogether different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject, the following incident occurred, the account of which I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,borrowed from notes taken by M. Cuendet (it was in 1894, and I only
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,knew Mlle. Smith by reputation at the time):
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“We notice that from the beginning of the seance Mlle. Smith describes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to us our familiar spirit [Leopold] as holding a lantern in his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand. Why? The table is shaken anew, about to tell us something. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following is then dictated to us by it: ‘_Arise. Take a lantern. Extend
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,your walk to the Municipal Building. Take the path which crosses the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meadow, and which ends at the Street of the Baths. In the middle of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,path, to the left, a few yards distant, a block of white stone will be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found. Starting from the block of stone, only one yard away from it,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,towards the setting sun, the pin so much sought for will be found. Go,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I accompany you._’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“I copy _verbatim_ this communication, which was obtained letter by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,letter. I add nothing, take nothing from it. General stupefaction! We
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hesitate! Finally, we all four rise, we light a lantern and set out. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was twenty minutes to ten o’clock.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“We walk slowly; we arrive at the Municipal Building, and take the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,path which leads from it to the Street of the Baths. In the middle,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the left, some yards distant, we, in fact, find the block of stone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicated. We search for a moment without result, and begin to fear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,we shall find nothing. Finally, towards the setting sun, a yard from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the block of stone, I find buried in the grass, covered with sand, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consequently badly soiled, the pin indicated.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“Some one had evidently stepped on it, as it was slightly bent. Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith uttered an exclamation of surprise, and we all four returned to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the house, to recover from our very natural emotion.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This case has remained in the eyes of Mlle. Smith and her spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,friends as one of the most striking and irrefragible proofs of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,objective and independent reality of Leopold. For the psychologist it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constitutes a very beautiful and interesting example of cryptomnesia,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,well worthy to figure among the very instructive cases collected by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mr. Myers, in which the memory of a subliminal perception (_i. e._,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,registered immediately without striking the normal personality) appears
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as a revelation in a dream of ordinary sleep, or under some other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,equivalent form of automatism. Here is “Leopold”—the subconsciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène—who, having felt the pin fall and noticed where it rolled,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first manifested himself in a passing nocturnal vision, and then took
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,advantage of the next spiritistic gathering to restore completely her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latent memories. It is not necessary to see anything intentional in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this restitution, the simple play of association of ideas sufficing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to explain that the memory of the situation of the pin stored up in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a subliminal stratum and stimulated by a desire to recover the lost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,object might have mechanically reappeared at the moment of the seance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,thanks to mediumistic autohypnotization, and gushed forth under
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the dramatic form, naturally appropriate to the environment, of an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparently supernormal piece of information furnished by Leopold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. _Retrocognitions._—The apparently supernormal revelations in regard
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the past, furnished at the seances of Mlle. Smith, can be divided
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into two groups—namely, whether they concern universal history, or deal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with private interests relative to the families of the sitters.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: The messages of the first group abound, under the form of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions accompanied by typtological explanations, in Hélène’s seances
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of 1894, but have almost wholly come to an end since I made her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,acquaintance, and I have never been witness of any. According to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reports which I have seen, all these retrocognitions have reference to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the history of Protestantism, or that of the French Revolution—_i. e._,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to two classes of facts which are among the best known in France to-day.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It goes without saying that the firmly convinced spiritistic group in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which these messages were received have never had a doubt that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparitions which Hélène perceived were the veritable personages they
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asserted themselves to be, habited as they were in the costume of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,period to which they belonged, communicating by means of the table, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speaking in the first person (except when Leopold acted as showman and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dictated in his own name the explanations asked for).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But as the content of these messages is always the _verbatim_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reproduction or almost exact equivalent of information which is to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,found in historical and biographical dictionaries, I cannot avoid being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inclined to the impression that we here are concerned with common facts
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of cryptomnesia.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If the intervention of the supernormal be absolutely insisted upon in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this case, it can only be manifested under the form of a telepathic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,transmission from the sitters to the medium. In favor of that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposition two facts may be urged: first, that Mlle. Smith passed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in that group as devoid of all historical knowledge, and was very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,much surprised at these revelations of facts totally unknown to her;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,secondly, that there were regularly in attendance at these seances one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or more members of the teaching body, who by their general education
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possessed, without any doubt whatever, either consciously or in a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,latent manner, all the historical knowledge, which, after all, was not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very great, displayed by Leopold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But these arguments are not of much weight in my opinion. To begin with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the second: as the sitters had their hands on the table at the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time with the medium, according to the spiritistic custom, they could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves, without any telepathy, properly speaking, and simply by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their slight, unconscious muscular contractions, have directed, unknown
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to themselves, the movements of that piece of furniture, Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only augmenting these shocks proceeding from her neighbors.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to the supposed ignorance of Mlle. Smith, it is not at all so great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as has been imagined, and the historical revelations obtained at her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances do not in any degree surpass the level of that which she could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have absorbed, consciously or unconsciously, at school and in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surroundings.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Moreover, the hypothesis which appears to me the most probable, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on which I rest, is that the messages come essentially from Hélène
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,herself—I ought rather to say from her subliminal memory; that,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,however, does not exclude a certain amount of co-operation on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part of the sitters, whose conversation, on the one hand, and their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unconscious muscular action upon the table, on the other, have often
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,maintained and directed the course of the subconscious ideas of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium and the automatic unfolding of her latent memories.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: Retrocognition of family events, which are exhibited in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith’s seances, have generally the savor of the unknown for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sitters, from the fact that they concern incidents of the past which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have never been printed save in the memories of certain aged persons or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a few lovers of local anecdotes.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I do not hesitate to see in these stories of other days, gushing forth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in visions and in dictations by the table in the course of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hemisomnambulisms, narratives heard in her childhood and long since
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forgotten by her ordinary personality, but which reappear by the aid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of mediumistic autohypnotization, bringing the deepest strata to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surface; the simple play of association, in an entirely natural manner,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then causes the memories relative to the families of the persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,present at the seance to be poured forth. There is nothing whatever of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the supernormal in all this, in spite of the dramatic form, the piquant
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and unexpected art, the amusing embellishments, of which the subliminal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,imagination bethinks itself—or I should rather say Leopold, in his rôle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of historiographer and scene-shifter of the past.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The judgment which I have pronounced is the result of a course of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inductive reasoning based on the retrocognitions of Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning my own family. I trust it may be allowable for me to enter
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon some details designed to justify my opinion.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I note first that all these retrocognitions with which Leopold honored
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me took place in the first six seances which I had with Hélène, after
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which there has not been a single one in the whole five years which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have since elapsed. This argues in favor of a limited group of latent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memories, which my introduction to the seances set free, a sort of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal sac or pocket which was emptied once for all on the first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occasions of my presence.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the second place, this knowledge only concerns outside details,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,susceptible of striking the attention of the gallery and of being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,carried from mouth to mouth. Since family histories have no great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interest for the ordinary reader, I will confine myself to citing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by way of example, the vision which so astonished me at my first
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,meeting with Hélène (p. 2), and which has already been published by M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Lemaître. I reproduce his narrative, giving real names:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“The medium [Mlle. Smith] perceives a long trail of smoke, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,envelopes M. Flournoy. ‘A woman!’ cries the medium, and, a moment
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,after, ‘Two women ... quite pretty, brunettes ... both are in bridal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,toilet!... This concerns you, M. Flournoy!’ [The table approves by a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rap.] They remain motionless; they have white flowers in their hair and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resemble each other a little; their eyes, like their hair, are black,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or, at all events, very dark. The one in the corner appears under two
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,different aspects; under both forms she is young—perhaps twenty-five
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,years old; on the one hand she remains with the appearance already
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,described (bridal toilet), and on the other she appears very luminous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a great space, a little more slender of visage, and surrounded by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a number of pretty children, in the midst of whom she appears very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,happy; her happiness manifests itself by her expression, but still more
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her surroundings. Both women seem ready to be married. The medium
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then hears a name, which at first escapes her, then returns little by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little. ‘=An!... An!... Dan ... Ran ... Dandi ... Dandiran!=’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“‘To which of these two women does this name belong?’ demands M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Flournoy—‘to the one you see under two aspects, or to the other?’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Answer: ‘To the one who is presented under two forms.’ The medium does
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not see the other woman as distinctly as the first, but all at once
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguishes a tall man by her side, who only passes by, when the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table dictates: ‘I am his sister; we will return!’ after which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scene changes and we pass to another subject.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This vision revolves altogether around the facts that my mother and her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sister were married on the same day; that they were brunettes, quite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pretty, and looked alike; that my father was tall; that my aunt married
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Dandiran and died while still young, without children; all matters
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which should have been of public notoriety in a small city like Geneva.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But the same is true of all the other retrocognitions of Mlle. Smith;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their content is always veridical, but at the same time is also such as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,could not fail to be known to a host of people. This causes me to doubt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whether there is at the base of these phenomena a really supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculty of retrocognition.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A third striking feature is, that all Hélène’s retrocognitions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning me are relative to the family of my mother, and are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,connected with two quite precise and brief periods, the first of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is many years previous to Mlle. Smith’s birth. This limitation as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,times and persons seems to me significant.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To clear up the matter, if possible, I addressed myself to the last
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,representative of the present generation of my family, Professor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Dandiran, of Lausanne, and laid the case before him. He did not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately remember whether my grandparents Claparède had any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communication, nearly half a century before, with the Smith family,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but on the following day he wrote me that he distinctly recalled a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,young woman of that name in whom his mother and aunt had been greatly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interested, and who had been employed by them as a dressmaker previous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to her marriage to a Hungarian.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,One understands that I had a reason for not addressing myself first to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mme. Smith herself; but I must do her the justice to state that when I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questioned her in turn, she very obligingly gave me all the information
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I desired, and which was in perfect accord with the statements of M.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Dandiran.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Without entering into details wearisome to the reader, it will be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sufficient for me to state that all the retrocognitions in which I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was involved were connected with two periods in which Mme. Smith had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,relations with my mother’s family, periods separated by an interval
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,during which these relations were suspended by the fact of M. and Mme.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith making a sojourn of several years in a foreign country. It would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been possible for Hélène to know directly the facts of the second
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,period, at which time she was about five or six years of age. As to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first period, which was many years prior to her birth (the time of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,double marriage of my mother and her sister in 1853), it is evident
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Mme. Smith has had many opportunities at a later date to narrate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these facts to her daughter; and it would have been altogether natural
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for her to have done so.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_Ab uno disce omnes._ Although I am less familiar with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,retrocognitions of Mlle. Smith concerning other families, everything
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contributes to prove to me that they are explicable in the same
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,manner. In two cases, at least, proof has been obtained that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mother of Mlle. Smith was found to have been in direct and personal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communication with the families concerned, exactly as was the case
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with my grandparents, and this circumstance is sufficient to account
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for the knowledge, very astonishing at first sight, contained in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revelations of Leopold.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To sum up—pure cryptomnesia seems to me to furnish a sufficient and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adequate explanation for Hélène’s retrocognitions, both as to family
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,events as well as historic facts.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,And no more in this domain of knowledge of the past than in those of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recovered objects and medical consultations have I thus far succeeded
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in discovering in her the least serious indication of supernormal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculties.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,V. INCARNATIONS AND SPIRIT MESSAGES
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The time having arrived to speak of spiritism, I feel ill at ease and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,embarrassed by my surroundings, for divers reasons, some of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I will set forth, without, however, endeavoring to explain them at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,length, since my aim is simply, as has been seen above (p. 373), to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicate my subjective ideas as to the standing of that doctrine, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,order that the reader may share, if he pleases, in my appreciation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the phenomena of this class presented by Mlle. Smith. 1 confess, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the first place, that spiritism is a subject which has the faculty of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,arousing my mirth, and develops a spirit of playfulness. I really do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not know why this should be the case, since that which concerns the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dead and the great beyond ought not to be a matter for joking. Perhaps
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the cause is to be found in the nature of the intermediaries, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the character of the messages with which the spirits are accustomed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to favor us. However it may be, I have ordinarily much difficulty in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,preserving a serious countenance in the presence of manifestations of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“disincarnates.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But I reproach myself bitterly with this facetious humor when I reflect
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that it is indulged in at the expense of conceptions and beliefs
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which supported the first steps of our race on its painful ascent,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the survival or atavic reapparition of which is yet, even to-day, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,source of moral strength, of happy certitude, of supreme consolation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for a host of my contemporaries, many of whom I have learned to know,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and who, moreover, inspire me with respect as well as admiration by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their uprightness of life, their nobility of character, the purity and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,elevation of their sentiments.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In the second place, I have often had the deceptive experience that,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when it comes to a discussion of it, spiritism possesses a great
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,advantage for its defenders, but which is most inconvenient for those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who would investigate it closely—of being fugitive and incapable of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being grasped on account of the fact of its double nature—a science
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and religion at the same time—which never permits it to be wholly and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entirely the one or the other.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,When we come to analyze and criticise, according to strict scientific
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,methods, the positive facts upon which it pretends to base its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fundamental argument —the reality of communication with the spirits
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the departed, through the intervention of mediums—as soon as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,adepts begin to unpack for you their stock of theories (I was about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to say their stock theories!) they are astonished at the lack of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ideal on the part of these terrible materialist-scientists, who are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intent upon searching for the “hidden rat” in the demonstrations of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism, instead of falling on their knees before the splendor of its
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,revelations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,A third cause of my uneasiness whenever obliged to approach this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subject is the fear of being misunderstood or misinterpreted, thanks to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the naïve and simple classification which prevails in the environments
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the “disincarnates” frequent.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Spiritism or materialism—these are the brutal alternatives to which one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,finds himself driven in spite of himself. If you do not admit that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirits of the dead reveal themselves by raps on the table or visions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the mediums, you are, therefore, a materialist! If you do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe that the destiny of the human personality is terminated at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,grave, you are a spiritist! This mode of nomenclature and labelling is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,surely puerile. Moreover, no one willingly consents to be thrust into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the company of those with whom, no matter how honorable they may be, he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is not in sympathy.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I also wish to state that I absolutely repudiate the above alternative.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is greater variety of choice in the cabinet of human thought. In
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the last century, for example, outside the spiritism of Swedenborg and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the materialism of Baron d’Holbach, there was yet the criticism of one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,named Kant, who made some noise in the world and whose vogue is even
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,now not absolutely extinct. I should not fear to range myself among his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,followers. And in our own times, if it was necessary for me to choose
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between Büchner and Allan Kardec, as the spiritist seems sometimes to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,believe, I would not hesitate to choose—in favor of M. Renouvier, or my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,deceased compatriot Charles Secrétan.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I hold to no other philosophy, and it suffices me, in order to repulse
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the whole of materialism and spiritism, to be the disciple—unworthy,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but convinced—of the Nazarene, who replied to the materialists of his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,time, not by spiritistic evocations, but by the simple words, “God is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not the God of the dead but of the living, for all live unto Him.” I am
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not sure whether this argument convinced the Sadducees, but it pleases
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me by its simplicity, and I have no desire for any other.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If God exists—I should say, if the supreme reality is not the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unconscious and blind force-substance of conventional monism, but that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sovereign personality (or _supra_ personality) which in the clear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consciousness of Christ made its paternal presence to be continually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,felt—if God exists, it is not, apparently, in order to play the rôle of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a perpetual undertaker of funereal pomp that he consents to exist, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to allow to fall forever into nothingness the poor creatures who wait
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,upon Him.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They may disappear from before our eyes, but they do not disappear from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,before His; for they are dead to us, but for Him, and, consequently,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in actual reality, they are living. Otherwise He would not be God.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This is all I need. I see nothing clearly, it is true, as to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concrete conditions of that other existence, of which the manner even,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,if it were revealed to me, would probably remain a sealed book to my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intelligence, hampered by the bonds of space and time. But of what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,importance is it? That which I am ignorant of, God knows; and while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,waiting for Him to call me to rejoin those who have preceded me, He
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is great enough for me to leave to Him the mysterious fate of our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personalities. “Since all live unto Him,” I ask no more than that, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as for the pretended demonstrations of spiritism, true or false, I do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not care a farthing.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Or I would prefer them to be false. And if they are true, if it is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,actually a law of nature that during long years to come, after this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,terrestrial existence, we must drag ourselves miserably from table to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,table and medium to medium, the best of us (not to speak of the others)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,displaying without shame the proofs of our mental decrepitude in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pitiable nonsense and wretched verses—oh, so much the worse!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is one misery and shame the more added to all those of which this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,satanic world is made up, a new calamity coming to crown the physical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and moral ills of a world against which the Christian continually
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,protests as he repeats “_Thy kingdom come_,” an additional scandal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,condemned to disappear when “His kingdom shall have come.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is nothing in common between the empirical, spatial, and temporal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,survivals which spiritism pretends to establish and that “eternal life”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proclaimed by the Prophet of Nazareth. These things, said Pascal, are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not of the same order. That is why I am not a spiritist.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Here rises a last point, which worries me when I ought to speak my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mind in regard to spiritism in the presence of spiritists. “You do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not personally hold,” it has been often objected to me, “to these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communications of the living with those who have gone before us into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the great unknown, and you cry out against spiritistic demonstrations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is all very well for you, who are a mystic, and to whom the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existence of God in Jesus Christ seems a sufficient guarantee of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,destinies of human personality and its ultimate palingenesis. But
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,every one has not the same temperament, and does not take so blithely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his ignorance of the kind of life which awaits him beyond the tomb.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To believe in God, and to abandon to Him with closed eyes the fate of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,those who leave us, carrying away with them the best portions of our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being, is all very well, but it is very difficult. The times of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psalmist who could say ‘_Though He slay me, yet will I trust Him_’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are no more; and as for Christ, He was certainly a very remarkable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,medium, but His simple affirmation would scarcely be taken to-day for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gospel words. The solid and the palpable are necessary to the ‘fools’
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of our epoch. They are not capable of admitting a higher world than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of sense, unless they are enabled to touch it with their finger
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by means of messages and the return of the dead themselves. Whence it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,results that every attack, every hostile attitude towards spiritism
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,tends directly to break down the only rampart which might henceforth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be efficacious against materialism and its disastrous consequences
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,—infidelity, egotism, vice, despair, suicide, and, finally, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,destruction and annihilation of the entire social organism. On the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other hand, when science at length shall recognize and consecrate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritism officially, thereupon, simultaneously with the tangible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certainty of another life, courage and strength will return to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hearts of individuals, devotion and all virtues will begin to flourish
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,once again, and an elevated humanity will soon see heaven descend upon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the earth, thanks to the connection established and daily practised
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the living and the spirits of the dead.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,My embarrassment is easily seen. On the one hand, I do not in any way
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,admit the foregoing objection. I do not think that the gospel has had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its day or is above the reach of “fools,” since it was for them that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its author designed it. I believe, on the contrary, that the Christian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faith, the faith of Christ or faith in Christ, is, in its inmost
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,essence, a psychological reality, a personal experience accessible to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the most humble, a fact of consciousness which will survive when all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,theological systems shall have been forgotten and all the clergy shall
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been abolished. That vital and regenerating power will save our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,civilization (if anything can save it) by means of the individuals
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whom it shall have regenerated, without owing anything to spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,theories or practices. Inversely, I do not share the optimism of those
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who would make of spiritism a social panacea, and who imagine that when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the moral consciousness on the one side and the religious consciousness
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the other have ceased to make themselves heard, the messages of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“disincarnates” will have better success. (“If they hear not Moses and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dead.”)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But, on the other hand, there are individual cases which are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,interesting and which certainly merit consideration. And for millions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and by a hundred different titles—religious belief, moral consolation,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,solemn and mysterious rites, old habit, etc.—spiritism is to-day the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pivot around which existence turns, and also its only support; would
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not the destruction of it, then, be productive of more harm than good,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and would it not be better to let matters take their course? Why
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prevent man from delighting in dreams, if he so pleases?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_All things are possible_, and was it not of the revenants that Hamlet
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,was thinking in his celebrated apostrophe, from which I have taken this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,principle?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,These are the things which perplex me: while waiting to find a way
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,out of them, and by way of summing up, it seems to me indispensable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to separate distinctly spiritism-religion, which is an assemblage
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of beliefs and practices dear to many, from spiritism-science, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,simple hypothesis designed to explain certain phenomena arising from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observation. The first tells me nothing, or rather it amuses me or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,repels me according to circumstances; but the more elevated sentiments,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and those worthy of all respect, which it inspires in its adepts,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impose upon me the duty of passing it by and ignoring it here. The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,second, on the contrary, does not fail to interest me, as it does all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who are curious in regard to natural phenomena.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For the question, Do human or animal individualities continue to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intervene in an effective manner in the physical, physiological, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychological phenomena of this universe after the loss of their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,corporeal and visible organism? is not an ordinary one. If there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are facts which peremptorily establish an affirmative answer, what
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,problems will arise, what an unexpected field of investigation will it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not open up to our experimental sciences! And even if the hypothesis
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is false, how captivating the study of the singular phenomena which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have been able to give it birth, which simulate the return of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dead to our observable world! It is understood, therefore, that, even
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,despoiled of all the emotional accessories in which it so easily wraps
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,itself in the heart and imagination of men, the empirical question of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immortality and spiritistic interventions, apparent or real, preserves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its scientific importance, and merits being discussed with the calm
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,serenity, independence, and strictness of analysis which belong to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experimental method.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It goes without saying that, _à priori_, the hypothesis of _spirits_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to explain the phenomena of mediums has in it nothing of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossible or the absurd. It does not even necessarily contradict,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as is sometimes imagined, the directing principle of physiological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychology—the psychological parallelism—which demands that every
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mental phenomenon shall have a physical correlative. For, in spite
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of our habit of considering the molecular or atomic phenomena of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the brain, the katabolism of the nerves, as the true concomitant of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,conscious processes, it may well be—it is even very probable—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these molecular movements do not constitute the ultimate physical term
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately paralleling the mental world, but that the real physical
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correlatives (spatial) of the (non-spatial) psychological phenomena
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,should be sought for in the vibrations of imponderable matter, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ether, in which the ponderable atoms and molecules are plunged somewhat
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,like grains of dust in the atmosphere, in order to make a sensible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,though somewhat inaccurate comparison.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The ethereal body, perispiritistic, astral, fluid, etc., of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,occultists, and of many thinkers who are not believers in occultism, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only a notion scientifically absurd when it is made to be an equivocal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and cloudy intermediary between the soul and the body, an unassignable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_tertium quid_, a plastic mediator of which nothing is known as to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its being material or spiritual or something else. But conceived as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a system of movements of the ether, it contains nothing absolutely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,anti-or extra-scientific in its nature; the connection between the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subjective facts of consciousness and the objective, material facts,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remains essentially the same whether one considers the material world
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under the imponderable form of ether or under the ponderable form of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,chemical atoms, of physical molecules, and of anatomical elements.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Nothing, then, would be radically opposed, from the point of view
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the natural sciences, to the existence of disincarnate spirits
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,wandering through space.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The foregoing will doubtless please my spiritistic friends. Here are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two facts which will please them less. First: I separate myself from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them when they pass prematurely from mere abstract possibilities to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the affirmation of actualities. Perhaps the outcome will prove them
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,right some day; perhaps in the near future, but we have not yet reached
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that point. I freely admit that never have circumstances been so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,favorable for the spiritistic doctrines as at present. The authentic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,return of George Pelham and other deceased persons, through Mrs. Piper
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,entranced, as intermediary, seems to be admitted by so many acute
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,observers, the phenomena observed for fifteen years past in the case of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this incomparable medium are at times so marvellous and surrounded with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,such solid scientific guarantees—the case is, in a word, so unheard of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and astounding in all respects, that those who are only acquainted with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it from a distance, by printed reports and oral narratives of immediate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,witnesses, feel themselves in a poor position for formulating their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,doubts and reservations upon this subject.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I fear, in the second place, for mediums and practical spiritists, that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when their hypothesis shall have been scientifically demonstrated the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,result may be very different from that which they now imagine it will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It might well happen that the cult of the table, mechanical writing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances, and all other mediumistic exercises, may receive their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,death-blow from the official recognition of spirits by science.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Suppose, in fact, that contemporaneous researches should at last have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,proved clearly that messages actually come from the disincarnate;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,it has already followed from the same researches that in the most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,favorable cases the veritable messages are very difficult to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguish from those which are not authentic. When people come to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understand that this sorting of messages is almost always beyond their
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,power, they will, perhaps, be put out of conceit with experiments in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which they have ninety-nine chances against one of being dupes of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves or others, and in which—a still more vexatious matter—if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they should even be so fortunate as to light upon the hundredth chance,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they would have no certain means of knowing it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This subject, decidedly, is fatal to me. I lose myself in digressions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when discussing it—very useless they are, too, since the verdict which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the future will pronounce upon the theory of spirits, with or without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,an ethereal body, matters little as far as the actual examination of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the messages furnished by Mlle. Smith is concerned. Even having become
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scientifically verified, spiritism will never absolve us from bringing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the analysis of the pretended communications less care and rigor
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,than while it was only an undemonstrated hypothesis; each particular
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,case will always demand to be scrutinized by itself, in order to make
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the distinction between that which in all probability only arises from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,many non-spiritistic causes, and the residue eventually proceeding from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the disincarnate.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I ought to state at the outset that, as far as Hélène’s mediumistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena are concerned, their careful analysis has not revealed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to me in them any evident vestige of the other world, not even of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,traces of a telepathic transmission on the part of the living. I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only succeeded in perceiving in them very beautiful and instructive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,examples of the well-known tendency of the subliminal imagination
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to reconstruct the deceased and to feign their presence, especially
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when the favorable suggestions of the surrounding environment incites
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,them to do so. Not being infallible, and bearing in mind Hamlet’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,principle, I will guard myself well from affirming that these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subliminal imitations and simulacra are absolutely free from any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirit collaboration; I content myself with repeating that I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not discovered any, and that it seems to me in the highest degree
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,improbable, and with leaving it to others to demonstrate its reality,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,if they think they are able to do so. Some examples taken from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,principal incarnations of Mlle. Smith will enable me to show after a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more concrete fashion my manner of regarding them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1. _Case of Mlle. Vignier._—This case has no evidential value whatever,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,since (as has been seen, p. 411), there were formerly relations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the Vignier family and Mme. Smith which suffice to explain the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,veridical knowledge manifested by Hélène in this incarnation.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I give an abridged recital of it, nevertheless, for the sake of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain points of psychological interest. None of the spectators had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any suspicion of these relations at the time of this scene, which was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,absolutely enigmatical to all of them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a seance at my house (on March 3, 1895, after a Hindoo vision,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,described p. 280), Mlle. Smith saw an unknown lady appear, of whom she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gave the following description: “A nose bent and hooked like the beak
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of an eagle; small gray eyes, very close together; a mouth with three
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,teeth only; a wicked smile, mocking expression; simple dress; a collar
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not of the fashion of to-day; she draws near to this portrait,[30] and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gazes at it not ill-naturedly.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The name of this person is asked, and the table (Leopold) commences to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spell: “_Mademoiselle_”—but refuses to go further, while Hélène sees
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the apparition laughing, “with a sly air”; as the name is insisted on,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table dictates: “_That does not concern you_,” then she begins to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,jump and skip as though glad of an opportunity to mock us.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Presently Hélène falls asleep and enters into somnambulism; she leaves
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the table and moves towards the portrait in question, before which she
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remains fixed, completely incarnating the unknown lady of her vision.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,I take down the portrait and place it in its frame upon an easy-chair;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately she kneels before it and contemplates it with affection;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,then, taking the frame in her right hand, while the left, very much
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agitated, plays with the cord, she ends, after many vain attempts, by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,saying with a great stammering, “_J—j—je l’aimais b—b—beaucoup: je
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,n’aime pas l’autre—j—j—je ne l’ai jamais aimée l’autre—j’amais bien mon
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,neveu—adieu!—je le vois._” “I liked it very much: I do not like the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other one: I never liked the other one. I was very fond of my nephew.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Adieu! I see him.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It was impossible to obtain any explanation of this incomprehensible
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,scene, until, having slipped a pencil and a writing-tablet into
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s hand, she scribbled feverishly, in a hand not her own, these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two words “_Mademoiselle Vignier_”; then she fell into a cataleptic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phase, from which she awakened without memory at the end of half an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hour.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This name of Vignier evoked in me far-off memories and vaguely recalled
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to my mind the fact that Professor Dandiran (who had married, as we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have seen, my mother’s sister) had an ancestress of that name; was it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she who returned to express to me by means of Mlle. Smith her affection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,for my mother, whose portrait she had so attentively regarded, and her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regrets, perhaps, that her nephew had not been preferred to my aunt?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,On the other hand, M. Cuendet recollected a Mlle. Vignier who had been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a friend of his family, but who did not correspond at all with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,description of Hélène’s visions; he promised to obtain information,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and, in fact, wrote me on the following day: “Dear Sir,—Here is some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,information on the subject of our seance of yesterday. This morning I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asked my mother: ‘Did you ever know another Mlle. Vignier than the one
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who was your friend?’ After an instant of reflection: ‘Yes,’ replied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she; ‘I did know another. She was M. Dandiran’s aunt, of Lausanne, his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mother’s sister. She stammered, and was not always very good-natured;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she had three large teeth which projected, and a hooked nose.’ It is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,useless to state to you that this was the first time I had heard her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spoken of.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This information, coinciding with my remembrances and Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vision, was later confirmed by M. Dandiran, who gave me the following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,information: “Your aunt, Mlle. Vignier, who died about thirty-five
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or forty years ago, loved her nephew very much; but she was made very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,angry by his marriage, and the sentence uttered before my mother’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,portrait could not have referred to a difference of sentiment in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,regard to the two sisters, for whom she always had an equal affection.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This sentence, on the contrary, is wonderfully well explained by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following facts: My mother and her sister having become betrothed at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same time, oil-paintings of both, of natural size, were made by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the same painter. These portraits were not of equal merit, and Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vignier, who was herself something of an artist, always considered
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that of my mother excellent, while the other, that of my aunt, she did
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not like at all. Mlle. Vignier was very lively, and M. Dandiran finds
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that the epithet ‘sly’ and the table dictating ‘_That does not concern
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,you_,’ very well express her character; she was, however, not at all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,malicious or mocking at heart, but it is true that persons who knew
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,her slightly could easily have gained that impression of her. She had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,three or four prominent teeth and stammered badly. In her photograph
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she wears a white collar, has a nose long and arched, but the eyes are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,rather large and wide apart. She always wore gold eye-glasses, of which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the medium did not speak.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,If the reader has had patience to read these details, he will have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remarked that the distinctive traits of Mlle. Vignier in the vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and her incarnation by Hélène (the stammering, the teeth, the shape
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the nose, the ill-natured air) coincide with those spontaneously
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicated by M. Cuendet, who had known her slightly; and that while
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,M. Dandiran, better posted as to his aunt’s character, finds the note
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of maliciousness or want of good-nature false, he acknowledges that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,people outside of her family could have been deceived concerning it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,That is to say, has not the imagination of Mlle. Smith produced the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exterior memory, the description according to public notoriety, as it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,were, which Mlle. Vignier left behind her? And if it be recalled that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at the period at which the two _fiancées_ were painted, Mme. Smith was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in communication with my maternal grandparents through the only sister
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Vignier, there would be a probability amounting almost to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certainty that these are contemporary remembrances, narrated some time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or other to Hélène by her mother, and which furnished the material for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this somnambulic personification.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In this example, to which I might add several analogous ones, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apparent _spirit control_ is reduced to latent memories of recitals
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,formerly heard by Hélène.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In other cases, in which, for lack of information, it has hitherto been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impossible to discover this wholly natural filiation of facts, simple
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,analysis of the circumstances and of the content of the communications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,indicates that, in all probability, they proceed from reminiscences
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and impressions appertaining to living individuals much rather than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from disincarnates. In other words, these messages and personifications
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,too evidently reflect the point of view of the medium or other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,living persons for it to be permissible to regard them as due to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intervention of deceased persons, whose attitude towards them would,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in all probability, be wholly different.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,2. _Case of Jean the Quarryman._—We have here to deal with a very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,curious spirit message concerning Mme. Mirbel, in which I cannot fail
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to see actual memories of the latter—transmitted I know not how (but
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not necessarily in a supernormal manner) to Mlle. Smith—rather than an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,authentic communication from a pretended disincarnate.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a seance at which Mme. Mirbel was not present, Hélène had the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hallucination of a very strong odor of sulphur; then the vision of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quarryman from the foot of Salève, in which she perceived and described
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in detail an unknown man, who, by the dictations of the table, was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,declared to be _Jean the Quarryman_, and charged the sitters with an
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affectionate message for Mme. Mirbel. The latter, interrogated on the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following day, recognized in the very circumstantial description of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this man, and under all the features of Hélène’s vision, perfectly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,correct facts connected with her childhood, and which had passed away
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the habitual circle of her ideas for more than twenty years. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerned a workman employed in her father’s quarries, and who, when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she was a little girl, had always evinced a special affection for her.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Let us suppose—in the absence of all proof that Mlle. Smith had ever
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,heard these remembrances of Mme. Mirbel’s childhood mentioned—that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,recourse must be had to the supernormal in order to explain the case.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It still would not amount to an intervention of the deceased quarryman;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and M. Lemaître was perfectly right, in my opinion, in clinging to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,telepathy and in hazarding the idea of an etheric influence, to which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène was subjected by Mme. Mirbel, who at the hour of this seance
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,happened to be half a kilometre distant from the place of the seance.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Without going out of the domain of telepathy, I still would prefer
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the hypothesis of a previous transmission in the course of one of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances at which Mme. Mirbel was present to that of telepathy at a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,great distance at the time of the seance. It is, in fact, not contrary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to that which is believed to be known of mental suggestion, to admit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that Hélène’s subliminal, in the state of Esenale, for example, could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in some way draw from Mme. Mirbel’s subliminal the latent memories
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which there lay buried for some time before being ready to reappear at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a seance at which she had some reason to think Mme. Mirbel would again
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be present.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Whatever the mode of its transmission may have been, the content of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this vision seems to me to indicate clearly that it has its origin in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the personal memories of Mme. Mirbel rather than in the posthumous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory of Jean the Quarryman. All the presumptions in this case are, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my mind, in favor of a memory of Mme. Mirbel, and not of a veritable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,communication from the other world. The personal aspect of the messages
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supposed to be dictated by the quarryman do not constitute an obstacle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to my interpretation or a guarantee of spiritistic authenticity, this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,aspect being the form that the automatisms habitually assume among
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,mediums.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,3. _Case of the Syndic Chaumontet and of the Curé Burnier._—The
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following case is the last. It is a very recent one, in which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spiritistic and the cryptomnesiac hypotheses exist face to face,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,apropos of signatures written by Mlle. Smith in somnambulism which do
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not lack similarity to the authentic signatures of the deceased persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to whom they are supposed to belong.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a seance at my house (February 12, 1899), Mlle. Smith has a vision
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a village on a height covered with vines; by a rocky road, she sees
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,descending from it a little old man, who has the air of a _quasi_
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,gentleman; he wears shoes with buckles, a large felt hat, the collar
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of his shirt is unstarched, and has points reaching up to his cheeks,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc. A peasant in a blouse, whom he meets, makes reverences to him, as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to an important personage; they speak a patois which Hélène does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understand She has the impression of being familiar with the village,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,but vainly searches her memory to discover where she has seen it.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Presently the landscape fades away, and the little old man, now clothed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in white and in a luminous space (_i. e._, in his actual reality
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a disincarnate), appears to draw near to her. At this moment,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as she leans her right arm upon the table, Leopold dictates by the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,index-finger: “_Kiss her arm._” I execute the order; Hélène’s arm at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first resists strenuously, then yields suddenly. She seizes a pencil,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and in the midst of the customary struggle relative to the manner of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,holding it (see p. 100), “_You are holding my hand too tightly_,” says
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she to the imaginary little old man, who, according to Leopold, wishes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to make use of it in order to write. “_You hurt me very badly; do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hold it so firmly.... What difference does it make whether it is a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pencil or a pen?_” At these words she throws away the pencil and takes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,up a pen, and, holding it between the thumb and index-finger, slowly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,traces in an unknown hand: “_Chaumontet, syndic_” (see Fig. 44).
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Then the vision of the village returns; at our desire to know the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,name of it she ultimately perceives a sign-post on which she spells
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_Chessenaz_,” a name which is unknown to us. Then, having by my advice
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,asked the little old man, whom she still sees, at what period he was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,syndic, she hears him answer, “1839.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is impossible to learn more; the vision vanishes and gives way to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,total incarnation of Leopold, who, in his deep Italian voice, speaks
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to us at length of various matters. I take advantage of it in order
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to question him upon the incident of the unknown village and syndic;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,his replies, interrupted by long digressions, may be summed up about
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as follows: “I am searching.... I traverse in thought the ascent of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,this great mountain pierced through at its foot by something, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,name of which I do not know; I see the name of Chessenaz, a village
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on a height, and a road which ascends to it. Search in this village;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,you will certainly find the name (Chaumontet); seek to examine his
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signature; this proof you will find there; you will find that the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,handwriting was that of this man.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To my question whether he sees this in Hélène’s memories and whether
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,she has ever been at Chessenaz, he replies in the negative as to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,first point and evasively as to the second: “Ask her; she has a good
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,memory for everything. I have not followed her in all her wanderings.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Awakened, Hélène could not furnish us any information. But the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,following day I found on the map a little village called Chessenaz, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Department of Haute-Savoie, twenty-six kilometres, in a straight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,line, from Geneva, and not far from the Crédo. As the Chaumontets are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not rare in Savoy, there was nothing unlikely in the fact of a person
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of that name having been syndic there in 1839.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Two weeks later I made a visit to Mme. and Mlle. Smith—there was
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,no seance held—when Hélène suddenly assumed the voice and accent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Leopold, without being aware of the change, and believing me to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be joking when I sought to cause her to notice it. Presently the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hemisomnambulism becomes accentuated; Hélène sees the vision of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other day, the village and then the little old man (the syndic)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reappear, but the latter is accompanied this time by a _curé_ with whom
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,he seemed on good terms and whom he called (which she repeats to me all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the while with Leopold’s Italian accent), “_My dear friend Burnier_”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As I ask whether this _curé_ could not write his name with Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hand, Leopold promised me by a digital dictation that I should have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that satisfaction at the next seance; then he begins to talk to me of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,something else by Hélène’s mouth, she being now entirely entranced.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,At the following seance at my house (the 19th of March), I remind
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Leopold of his promise. He answers at first by the finger: “_Do you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,very much desire that signature?_” and it is only upon my insisting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that he consents. Hélène then is not long in again seeing the village
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and the _curé_, who after divers incidents takes hold of her hand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as the syndic had done, and traces very slowly with the pen these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,words, “_Burnier greets you_” (Fig. 44); then she passes into other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,somnambulisms. The moment had arrived to clear up the matter. I wrote
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,at hazard to the mayor’s office at Chessenaz. The mayor, M. Saussier,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,had the kindness to answer without delay: “During the years 1838-39,”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,stated he to me, “the syndic of Chessenaz was a Chaumontet, Jean,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whose signature I find attached to divers documents of that period.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We also had as _curé_ M. Burnier, André, from November, 1824, up to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,February, 1841; during this period all the certificates of births,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marriages, and deaths bear his signature.... But I have discovered in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,our archives a document bearing both signatures, that of the syndic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Chaumontet and that of the _curé_ Burnier. It is an order for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,payment of money. I take pleasure in transmitting it to you.” I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,caused to be reproduced in the middle of Fig. 44 the fragment of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,original document (dated July 29, 1838), bearing the names of these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,two personages; the reader can thus judge for himself in regard to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,quite remarkable similarity which there exists between these authentic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,signatures and those automatically traced by the hand of Mlle. Smith.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,My first idea was, as may be supposed, that Mlle. Smith must some time
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or other have seen some certificates or documents signed by the syndic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or by the _curé_ of Chessenaz, and that it was these forgotten visual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,flashes, reappearing in somnambulism, which had served her as inner
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,models when her entranced hand retraced these signatures. One may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,likewise imagine how angry such a supposition would make Hélène, who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has no recollection whatever of having ever heard the name of Chessenaz
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nor of any of its inhabitants, past or present. I only half regret
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,my imprudent supposition, since it has availed to furnish us a new
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and more explicit manifestation of the _curé_, who, again taking hold
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Mlle. Smith’s arm at a later seance (May 21st, at M. Lemaître’s)
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comes to certify to us as to his identity by the attestation, in due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and proper form, of Fig. 43. As is there seen, he makes it twice;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being deceived as to the signature, he incontinently, with disgust,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,crosses out that which he had so carefully written, and recommences
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on another sheet; this second draft, in which he has omitted the word
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,“_soussigné_” (“undersigned”) of the first, took him seven minutes to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trace, but leaves nothing to be desired as to precision and legibility.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This painstaking calligraphy is very like that of a country _curé_ of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sixty years ago, and in default of another specimen for comparison, it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,presents an undeniable analogy of hand with the authentic receipt of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the order for payment of money of Fig. 44.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 43. Certificates written (May 21, 1899) by Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Smith while in a trance. The one above was feverishly crossed out in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, finishing the faulty signature. The one below was afterwards written
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, in seven minutes. Natural size. [From the collection of M. Lemaître.]]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Neither Mlle. Smith nor her mother had the least notion in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the _curé_ or the syndic of Chessenaz. They nevertheless informed me
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that their family formerly had some relatives and connections in that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,part of Savoy, and that they are still in communication with a cousin
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,who lives at Frangy, an important town nearest the little village of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Chessenaz. Hélène herself made only a short excursion in that region,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,some dozen years ago; and if, in following the road from Seyssel to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Frangy, she traversed some parts of the country corresponding well to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,certain details of her vision of the 12th of February (which she had
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the feeling of recognizing, as we have seen, p. 432), she has not, on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the other hand, any idea of having been at Chessenaz itself, nor of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,having heard it mentioned. “Moreover,” says she, “for those who can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,suppose that I could have been at Chessenaz without remembering it, I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would affirm that even had I gone there I would not have been apt to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,consult the archives in order to learn that a syndic Chaumontet and a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,_curé_ Burnier had existed there at a period more or less remote. I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have a good memory, and I positively affirm that no one of the persons
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,around me during those few days while I was away from my family ever
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,showed me any certificate, paper—anything, in a word—which could
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have stored away in my brain any such memory. My mother, at the age
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of fourteen or fifteen, made a trip into Savoy, but nothing in her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remembrances recalls her ever having heard these two names uttered.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The facts are now presented, and I leave to the reader the privilege of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,drawing such conclusion from them as shall please him.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, [Illustration: Fig. 44. Comparison of the signatures of the syndic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, Chaumontet and of the curate Burnier, with their pretended signatures
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, as disincarnates given by Mlle. Smith in somnambulism. In the middle
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of the figure, reproduction of a fragment of an order for payment of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, money of 1838. Above and below, the signatures furnished by the hand
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore, of Hélène. Natural size.]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This case seemed to me worthy to crown my rapid examination of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal appearances which embellish the mediumship of Mlle. Smith,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,because it sums up and puts excellently in relief the irreconcilable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and hostile respective positions of the spiritistic circles and mediums
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on the one side, perfectly sincere but too easily satisfied—and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,investigators somewhat psychological on the other, always pursued by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the sacrosanct terror of taking dross for gold. To the first class,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the least curious phenomenon—an unexpected vision of the past, some
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dictation of the table or the finger, an access of somnambulism, a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,resemblance of handwriting—suffices to give the sensation of contact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the unknown and to prove the actual presence of the disincarnate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,world. They never ask themselves what proportion there could well
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be between these premises, however striking they may be, and that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,formidable conclusion. Why and how, for example, should the dead,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,returning at the end of a half-century to sign by the hand of another
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,person in flesh and blood, have the same handwriting as when alive?
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The same people who find this altogether natural, although they have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,never seen any absolutely certain cases of it, fall from the clouds
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,when the possibility of latent memories is invoked before them, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,which the present life furnishes them, moreover, daily examples—which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they have not, it is true, ever taken the trouble to observe.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The psychologists, on the contrary, have the evil one in them in going
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to look behind the scenes of the memory and the imagination, and when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the obscurity prevents them from seeing anything, they have the folly
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to imagine that they will end by finding that which they are seeking—if
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,only a light could be had.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Between these two classes of temperaments so unlike, it will, I fear,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be very difficult ever to arrive at any satisfactory and lasting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,understanding.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CHAPTER XI
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                              CONCLUSION
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This volume reminds me of the mountain which gave birth to a mouse.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Its length would be excusable if only it marked a step in advance in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the field of psychology or physiology, or as to the question of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,supernormal. As such is not the case, it is unpardonable, and nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more is left me to do except to make clear its deficiencies in this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,triple aspect.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,First: From the physiological point of view, it is apparent that
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Mlle. Smith, as is doubtless true of all mediums, presents during her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visions and somnambulisms a plenitude of disturbances of motility and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sensibility, from which she seems entirely free in her normal state.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But these trifling observations do not suffice to solve the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,neuropathological problem of mediumship, and the question still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remains open as to whether that term corresponds to a special category
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of manifestations and to a distinct syndrome, or whether it merely
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constitutes a happy euphemism for various scientific denominations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,already in use.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To endeavor to fix the connections of mediumship with other functional
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,affections of the nervous system, it would first be necessary to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possess exact intelligence on a number of important points still
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,enveloped in obscurity. In regard to some of these, such as the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena of periodicity, of meteorological and seasonal influences, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,impulses, and of fatigue, etc., we have only very vague and incomplete
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,hints. And we know almost nothing of other still more essential
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,questions, such as the relations of equivalence and substitution
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,between the various modalities of automatism (nocturnal visions,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,crepuscular states, complete trances, etc.), the effect of spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exercises, and especially of that of the seances upon nutrition or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,denutrition (variations of temperature, of urotoxicity, etc.), which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would permit the comparison of spontaneous seizures and those excited
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by mediumship with those of the more serious nervous affections, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phenomena of heredity, similar or reversed, etc.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Let us hope that a near future will establish some good mediums and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their observers in practical conditions favorable to the elucidation of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,these various problems, and that the day will come when the true place
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of mediumship in the framework of nosology will be discovered.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Secondly: From the psychological point of view, the case of Mlle.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Smith, although too complex to be reduced to a single formula, is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explicable _grosso modo_ by some recognized principle, the successive
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or concurrent action of which has engendered her multiple phenomena.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,There is, in the first place, the influence, so often verified, of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,emotional shocks and of certain psychic traumatisms upon mental
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,dissociation. By means of these the birth of hypnoid states may become
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the germ either of secondary personalities more or less strongly marked
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(we have seen that the first manifestations of Leopold in the childhood
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Hélène are attributable to this cause) or of somnambulistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,romances, which hold the same relation towards the normal state as does
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that exaggeration of stories and indulgence in reveries to which so
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,many are addicted—perhaps all of us.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,We must also take into consideration the enormous suggestibility and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,auto-suggestibility of mediums, which render them so sensitive to all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the influences of spiritistic reunions, and are so favorable to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,play of those brilliant subliminal creations in which, occasionally,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the doctrinal ideas of the surrounding environment are reflected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,together with the latent emotional tendencies of the medium herself.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The development of the personality of Leopold-Cagliostro, starting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the moment at which Mlle. Smith began her seances, is easily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,explained in this manner, as well as the Martian dream and the previous
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,existences of the Hindoo princess and the queen of France.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,And, finally, we must note the phenomena of cryptomnesia, the awakening
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and setting to work of forgotten memories, which easily account for the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,elements of truth contained in the great preceding constructions and in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the incarnations or casual visions of Mlle. Smith in the course of her
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,seances.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But besides this general explanation how many points of detail there
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are which remain obscure! For example, the precise origin of Hélène’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sanscrit, and many of her retrocognitions, for want of information
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concerning the thousand facts of her daily life whence the ideas which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nourish her somnambulism may have been drawn! And how difficult it
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is to gain a correct idea of her case as a whole, on account of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,crudity of our actual notions as to the constitution and organization
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the human being, of our almost total ignorance of psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ontogeny!
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Without mentioning Hélène’s ephemeral incarnations (in which I have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,shown there is no reason far seeing anything beyond the imitations due
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to autosuggestion), the divers more stable personalities which manifest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves in her hypnoid life—Leopold, Esenale, and the actors of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Martian romance, Simandini, Marie Antoinette, etc.—are only, in my
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opinion, as I have hinted on many occasions, the varied psychological
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,states of Mlle. Smith herself—allotropic modifications, as it were,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or phenomena of polymorphism of her personality. For no one of these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,personalities corresponds sufficiently with her ordinary personality by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intellectual faculties, the moral character, separation of memories, to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,justify the hypothesis of a foreign _possession_.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,But the theory of psychic polymorphism is still very imperfect, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,inadequate to explain the embryological shades which shine forth in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hélène’s subliminal products—the retrograde perspective which they open
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,as to the different stages or periods of her evolution. The Martian
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cycle, with its unknown language, evidently betrays an eminently
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,puerile origin and the display of an hereditary linguistic aptitude,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,buried under Hélène’s ordinary self; whereas the Hindoo romance denotes
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a more advanced age, and that of Marie Antoinette seems to have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,sprung from still more recent strata, contemporaneous with the actual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,normal personality of Mlle. Smith. The primitive nature and different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ages of the various hypnoid lucubrations of Mlle. Smith seem to me to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,constitute the most interesting psychological fact of her mediumship.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It tends to show that the secondary personalities are probably, in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,their origin, as the idea has been sometimes suggested, phenomena of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,reversion of the ordinary actual personality, or of momentary returns
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of inferior phases, long since passed, and which normally should have
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,been absorbed in the development of the individuality, instead of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,breaking forth again in strange proliferations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Thirdly: As to the supernormal, I believe I have actually found a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,little telekinesis and telepathy. As to lucidity and spiritistic
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,messages, I have only encountered some brilliant reconstructions, which
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the hypnoid imagination, aided by latent memory, excels in fabricating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in the case of mediums. I do not complain of this, since for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,psychology, which is not specially enamoured of the marvellous, these
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,admirably successful imitations are also interesting and instructive on
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,account of the light which they throw upon the inward workings of our
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,faculties.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Of course Mlle. Smith and her friends see things in a very different
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,light. With Hélène everything, or almost everything, is supernormal,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the reminiscences of her lives as Marie Antoinette and Simandini,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the Martian and the incarnations of Cagliostro, of Mlle. Vignier, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the _curé_ of Chessenaz.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,And now let us admit, hypothetically, that I have not been able to see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the supernormal, which was plainly before my eyes, and that it is this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,blindness of mine alone which has prevented me from recognizing the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,real presence of Joseph Balsamo, my own mother, the Hindoo princess,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,etc.—or, at all events, the presence of real, disincarnate, independent
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,spirits. It is, of course, to be regretted, but then it is I alone who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will be in disgrace on the day when the truth shall be made manifest.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,For, as to progress in our knowledge of things, everything is to be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feared from easy credulity and obstinate dogmatism, but that progress
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will not be arrested or seriously retarded by possible errors,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,committed in good faith, through an exaggerated severity of application
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and a too strict observance of the principles themselves of all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,experimental investigation; while, on the contrary, the obstacles and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the difficulties which the necessities of the method multiply along
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its path have always been a strong stimulant, producing new movements
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forward and more durable conquests based on better demonstrations.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,It is better, then, to follow my advice—in the well-understood interest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of and for the advancement of science, in a domain where superstition
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is always ready to give itself free play—it is better to err through
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,excess of caution and strictness of method than to run the risk of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,being sometimes deceived; it is better to allow some interesting fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to escape for the moment, rather than to open the door to the follies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the imagination by a relaxation of necessary caution.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,As to Mlle. Hélène Smith, supposing that I have failed to recognize
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in her phenomena which are really supernormal (which, in that case,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will some day be better set forth by other observers), she will,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,nevertheless, accomplish more in the way of discovering the real truth,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,whatever it may be, in submitting herself disinterestedly to my free
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,criticisms, than by doing as so many useless mediums have done, who,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,afraid of the light, in their foolish eagerness for the triumph of a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cause very dear to their hearts, have shunned close investigation, and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,would have us rely upon their word alone.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,They forget the saying of Bacon, which is ever being confirmed: “_Truth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,is the daughter of time, not of authority._”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,                                THE END
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,FOOTNOTES:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[1] _I. e._, Spirit-rapping—the faculty of obtaining responses by means
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of raps upon a table.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[2] Glossolalia signifies the “gift of tongues,” or the ability to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,speak foreign languages without having consciously acquired them.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[3] This term is used to designate the visions which manifest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,themselves at the moment of awakening from sleep immediately prior to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,complete awakening, and which form a pendant to the well-known, much
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,more frequent hypnagogic hallucinations, arising in the intermediate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state between sleep and waking.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[4] Vision relating to the Oriental cycle; the man was the Arab sheik,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the father of Simandini.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[5] The following are some of these impromptu rhymes, surely up to the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,level of the circumstances which inspired them, but by which we ought
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,not to judge the _conscious_ poetic faculties of Mlle. Smith:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To a little girl proud of her new shoes:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Marcelle est là, venez la voir,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Elle a ses petits souliers noirs.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,In a “culinary” discussion:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Vous détestez les omelettes,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Autant que moi les côtelettes.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To a person slightly vain:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Vos richesses, ma chère amie,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Ne me font point du tout envie!”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[6] The confusion of sensations in the two sides of the body, as when a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,person locates in the right leg a touch upon the left leg.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[7] See, on allochiria, P. Janet, _Stigmates mentaux des hysteriques_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,pp. 66-71; and _Nevroses et idées fixes_, vol. i. p. 234.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[8] See Lehmann’s _Aberglaube und Zauberei_, p. 217 _et seq._
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Stuttgart, 1898.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[9] W. James, “Thought Tends to Personal Form.” _Principles of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Psychology_, vol. i. p. 225 _et seq._ New York, 1890.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[10] Alexandre Dumas, _père_, _Memoirs of a Physician_, chap. xv.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[11] The one which is found, for example, at the beginning of the _Vie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,de Joseph Balsamo_, etc., translated from the Italian (3d edition,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Paris, 1791), and which has been several times reproduced. Mlle. Smith
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,has hanging over her fireplace a fine copy of this portrait.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[12] See, _e.g._, Ferrari, Hericourt, and Richet, “Personality and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Handwriting,” _Revue philosophique_, vol. xxi. p. 414.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[13] C. Flammarion, _La Planète Mars et ses conditions d’habitabilité_,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,p. 3. Paris, 1892.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[14] Compare the case of Mlle. Anna O. Brener et Frend, _Studien über
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Hysterie_, p. 19. Vienna, 1895.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[15]
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    “Do not think that in loving you as a tender brother
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    I shall tell you all the profound mysteries of heaven;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    I shall help you much, I shall open for you the way,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    But it is for you to seize and seek with joy;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    And when you shall see her released from here below,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    When her mobile soul shall have taken flight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    And shall soar over Mars with its brilliant tints;
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    If you would obtain from her some light,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    Place your hand very gently on her pale forehead
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    And pronounce very softly the sweet name of Esenale!”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[16] Allusion to the seance of November 25, 1894, at M. Lemaître’s. See
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,p. 146.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[17] That is to say, he died on Mars, where he had been reincarnated.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[18] Allusion to seance of February 2, 1896. See p. 154.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[19] These are texts 16-20, 26, 28, 31, 34, 37-39. They are further
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distinguished by an asterisk.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[20] A literal English translation of each text will be found
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediately beneath the French equivalents of the Martian words.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[21] If it is objected that the Martian lacks the essential character
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of a language—that is to say, a practical sanction by use; by the fact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of its serving as a means of communication between living beings—I
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will not answer, like Mlle. Smith, that after all we know nothing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,about that, but will simply say that the social side of the question
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,does not concern us here. Even if Volapük and Esperanto are not used,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,they are none the less languages, and the Martian has, in regard to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,its artificial construction, the psychological superiority of being
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a natural language, spontaneously created, without the conscious
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,participation, reflective or willing, of a normal personality.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[22] De Marlès’ _General History of India, Ancient and Modern, from the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Year 2000 B. C. to our Own Times._ Pp. 268-269. Paris, 1828.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[23] Robert Sewell. _Lists of Antiquarian Remains in the Presidency of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Madras._ Vol i. p. 238 (1882.) Citation by M. Barth. I have not been
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,able to consult this work.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[24] Buchanan. _A Journey from Madras through the Countries of Mysore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Canara, and Malabar, etc._ 3 vols. 4to. London, 1807.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[25] James Rennell. _Description Historique et Géographique de
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,l’Indostan._ Translated from the English. Paris, an. VIII. (1800). 3
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,vols., 8vo and atlas 4to.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[26] Dow. _History of Hindustan._ Translated from the Persian of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Ferishta. London, 1803. M. Michel suggests Wilks’s _Historical Sketches
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the South of India_ (London, 1810) as having possibly served as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,a source of information for De Marlès. If some learned reader may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,discover any traces of Sivrouka antecedent to De Marlès, I shall be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,under great obligation to him if he will communicate the information to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,me.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[27] It will be readily understood that this vision represents Marie
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Antoinette with her three children and Madame Elizabeth.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[28] I have respected the orthography as well as the complete absence
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of punctuation of this bit of automatic writing, confining myself to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,marking by vertical bars its evident separation into verses of eight
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,feet. It is written in the inclined and regular hand called that of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Marie Antoinette (like that of Fig. 40), but with a pencil too pale to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,permit its reproduction.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[29] By this is meant the bringing or conveying of material objects
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,into a closed space—the passage of one solid body through another.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,[30] A small oil-portrait of my mother.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,End of Project Gutenberg's From India to the planet Mars, by Théodore Flournoy
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FROM INDIA TO THE PLANET MARS: A STUDY OF A CASE OF SOMNAMBULISM WITH GLOSSOLALIA ***
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,be renamed.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,States without permission and without paying copyright
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,license, especially commercial redistribution.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,START: FULL LICENSE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,www.gutenberg.org/license.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,you share it without charge with others.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,country other than the United States.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,  
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,beginning of this work.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ License.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,provided that:
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        Literary Archive Foundation.”
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        works.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        receipt of the work.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,    
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,forth in Section 3 below.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,cannot be read by your equipment.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,DAMAGE.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,without further opportunities to fix the problem.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remaining provisions.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Defect you cause.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,from people in all walks of life.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Literary Archive Foundation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,public support and donations to carry out its mission of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,status with the IRS.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,approach us with offers to donate.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,volunteer support.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,edition.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,facility: www.gutenberg.org.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,
from-india-to-planet-mars,1900,flournoy-theodore,