the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,This little book, like my book on Christian Science which appeared a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,year ago, is the evolution of a pamphlet.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The first half of the pamphlet was written in the middle of a sleepless
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,night some years ago. The last half was written about two years ago,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,after I had found relief by auto-suggestion from the lifelong bondage
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of insomnia and had thereby doubled my capacity both for work and play.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,First published in the spring of 1907 as my weekly message under the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,heading of “The Parson’s Outlook” to the 5000 readers of _The Hampshire
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gazette_ in and about Northampton, the article on sleeplessness was
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,republished by request in the same paper some months later; then, as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the demand increased for it, in pamphlet form. This year past it has
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,been used in the Emmanuel Clinic, both in Boston and Northampton, with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,such gratifying results that more than 300 sufferers from insomnia in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,one part of the country or another have testified by letter or by word
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of mouth to the benefit they have received from it.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,At the suggestion of the Rev. Elwood Worcester, Ph.D., D.D., two
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,magazine editors, and two publishing houses, the pamphlet is now
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,enlarged into a book with the earnest hope that the suggestions it
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,contains may be of service to many whom the pamphlet, privately printed
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and gratuitously distributed, could not reach at all.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,There are books enough, perhaps, on the theory of sleep. The volume
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,by Marie de Manaceïne on _Sleep—Its Physiology, Pathology, Hygiene,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and Psychology_ will surely long remain the standard work. Dr. Upson’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_Insomnia and Nerve Strain_ is based on the author’s discovery of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,vaso-neural circuit and will not be neglected by those who wish to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,understand certain physical obstacles to sleep which have hitherto been
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,largely overlooked. _Religion and Medicine_, the official book of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Emmanuel Movement, is indispensable to any knowledge of the drugless
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cure of sleeplessness and other nervous functional disorders. And the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,writings of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell, Dr. Woods Hutchinson, and Dr. J.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Madison Taylor are, of course, of lasting value on this subject.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The purpose of this little book is very simple. It is designed to help
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,physicians, Emmanuel workers, and others who believe in the art of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,natural sleep to aid those committed to their care. It is designed,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,also, to be of service to the thousands who never go to anyone for aid
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in learning how to sleep, and to this end is kept as free as possible
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,from all technical terms and all theoretical discussions.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,To Dr. Worcester I owe the title of the book; to Rev. H. L. Taylor of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the Emmanuel Church staff certain of the illustrative cases from the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Emmanuel Clinic in Boston; to Mr. W. P. Cutter, Librarian of the Forbes
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Library in Northampton, many special courtesies; and to Dr. Francis
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,S. Wilson, expert diagnostician and experienced practitioner, goodly
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,counsel in the preparation of the book.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Trusting that directly or indirectly this little book may set many an
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,unhappy victim of insomnia free from his hard bondage, I send it forth
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in faith.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  L. P. P.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  ST. JOHN’S RECTORY,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  NORTHAMPTON, MASS.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  September 15, 1908.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,CONTENTS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                                                     PAGE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  OUR NATIONAL DISEASE                                   1
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THEORIES OF SLEEP                                      5
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  WHAT SLEEP REALLY IS                                   8
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE NECESSITY OF SLEEP                                12
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  INSOMNIA AND ITS CAUSES                               15
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE VALUE OF DRUGS                                    18
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE REMOVAL OF ALL PHYSICAL
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  CAUSES                                                25
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  GENERAL DIRECTIONS                                    29
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  SECONDARY AIDS TO SLEEP                               33
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  DR. LEARNED’S PLAN                                    35
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  RELAXATION AND RHYTHMIC
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  BREATHING                                             38
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE EMMANUEL METHOD                                   43
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  FAITH REQUIRED IN GOD AND MAN                         47
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE SPECIFIC TREATMENT                                53
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  SOME IMMEDIATE RESULTS                                64
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE CO-OPERATION OF THE PATIENT                       67
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  THE ULTIMATE EFFECT                                   72
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  ILLUSTRATIVE CASES                                    74
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The Art of Natural Sleep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,OUR NATIONAL DISEASE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Neurasthenia is now our national disease. Nervousness, nervous
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,exhaustion, nervous prostration, and kindred names are given to it by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the doctors. Whatever they may chance to call it, the doctors usually
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,agree as to its causes, symptoms, consequences.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Even the laity are now thoroughly informed as to the effect of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,neurasthenia on the nerves and on the mind. It wears the nerves
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,threadbare and robs the mind of all serenity. It steals the zest from
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,work, the joy from play. It frequently reduces its unhappy victim to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the single occupation of worrying by day because he fears he will not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep at night, of worrying at night because he knows that worn and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,haggard he will have no buoyancy and poise to play a man’s part in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,day to come.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The day’s work is done, when done at all, with the feverish inquietude
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of the unrested brain. The evening’s pleasures, when infrequently he
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ventures to take part in them, are clouded by the listlessness the lack
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of sleep invariably brings. The silent night, when by any reach of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,imagination it can be thus described,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  Of fret, of dark, of thorn, of chill,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,is rendered hideous by the flitting of attention like a bird from
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,bough to bough, by the random running of the memory down each unhappy
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,recollection of the past, by the deflection of the mental vision till
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,it loses all perspective and disqualifies the sufferer to think
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,straight concerning even the trivial occurrences of everyday existence.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,No wonder that in Kipling’s story _At the End of the Passage_, when
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Spurstow finds his sleepless friend in the last stage of insomnia, he
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sadly but severely says, “Sleeplessness of your kind being very apt to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,relax the moral fibre in little matters of life and death, I’ll just
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,take the liberty of spiking your guns;” and then as a safeguard, robs
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Hummil of his rifle and revolver.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THEORIES OF SLEEP
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Various theories have at one time or another been suggested to account
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,for sleep. Some are both bewildering and absurd. There was a time when
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,it was seriously urged that sleep has in the thyroid gland its special
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,organ, but when someone in the interest of the theory excised the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,thyroid gland, only to increase in certain instances the tendency to go
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to sleep and stay asleep, the theory was at once abandoned even by its
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,staunchest advocates.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Finding that sleep usually follows fatigue, and that fatigue is a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,chemical phenomenon, the so-called chemical theory was next set up,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and Sommer was quite sure that sleep comes as a consequence of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,exhaustion of the reserve of oxygen in the tissues and the blood,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and its replacement by carbonic acid during sleep. But here, too,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,experimentation has been both inadequate and inconclusive.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The vaso-motor theory, as modified by Howell, that sleep is due to the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,anæmia of the cortical layer of the brain, which invariably takes place
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,when the blood pressure in the arteries at the base of the brain falls,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,has had a larger and a longer following. But convincing proof is yet to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,be secured, and Dr. Percy G. Stiles of the Bellevue Hospital ends his
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,discussion of the subject with a guarded inference that there may be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,truth in both the theories, and that eclecticism is in consequence the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,wisest policy for the histologist.[1]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Footnotes
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[1] _Popular Science Monthly_, September, 1903.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,WHAT SLEEP REALLY IS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Sleep, however we account for it, is “the resting time of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,consciousness.”[2] To be sure, there is no absolute arrest of brain
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,activity. There is always, even in the soundest sleep, some cerebral
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,activity.[3] We dream. We have nightmares. We sometimes work out
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,problems in our sleep which have defied our every waking effort. There
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,is on record one instance of a college student who got up at three
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,o’clock to solve successfully, while sound asleep, a problem he could
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,not work out at all before he went to bed. There is another instance
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,well attested of a British consul in Syria who, after tearing up letter
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,after letter which he wrote to a Lebanon emir, went to sleep in sheer
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,despair, only to find when he awoke in the morning, that he had written
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,an elaborate letter which in every way satisfied the multitudinous
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,demands of Arabic diplomacy insistent to the last on all the niceties
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of Oriental etiquette.[4]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Byron was right. Sleep is neither life nor death. It is a world apart.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        Sleep has its own world,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    A boundary between the things misnamed
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    Death and Existence; sleep has its own world.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Consciousness may be suspended. But the cortical centres are frequently
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,as active when we are asleep as when awake. The attention can be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,maintained with such unbroken steadiness as to awake some persons
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with the exactness of an alarm clock on the very minute, even though
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,for purposes of deception the hands of the clock may have been set
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,back without their knowledge. The motor centres can be counted on so
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,confidently that they will drive the somnambulist with the accuracy of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,a trained chauffeur to his appointed destination. Sleep is, therefore,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,nothing more than a temporary suspension of a portion of the brain’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,activity.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[2] Manaceïne, 62, 69, 70.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[3] Dr. J. Madison Taylor in the _Popular Science Monthly_, September,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1905.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[4] Thomson’s _Brain and Personality_, 314.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE NECESSITY OF SLEEP
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,But that suspension is an absolute necessity to health of mind and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,body. Men have been known to go for forty days without nourishment
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and retain unimpaired all the mental faculties. No man goes for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,even three days and nights without sleep except he pay a penalty in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,mental equipoise, and death itself is apt to bring his misery to an
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,end, it is claimed, in five sleepless nights and days. Professors
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Patrick and Gilbert of the University of Iowa found, some years
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ago, that in certain cases there were after two nights of complete
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,wakefulness hallucinations, loss of attention, inability to remember,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and unmistakable evidences both of mental disorganisation and physical
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,depression.[5] In Kipling’s story, tragically true to life, Hummil
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,died after eighty-four hours of unrelieved insomnia, and the author’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,closing words would seem to indicate that madness overtook him at the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,last: “In the staring eyes was written terror beyond expression of any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,pain.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The occasional genius like Napoleon may perhaps get on habitually
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with four hours of sleep each night, and the mother watching by the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sick-bed of her child may go for weeks in an emergency with but an
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,hour or two of sleep at intervals, infrequent and irregular. But the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sensible division made by Alfred the Great into eight hours for sleep,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,eight hours for work, eight hours for play, will be as far as possible
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,observed by the right-minded and far-seeing everywhere.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[5] _Psychological Review_, September, 1896.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,INSOMNIA AND ITS CAUSES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Insomnia reduced to simplest terms is nothing but the inability to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep. While the causes of insomnia may sometimes be exceedingly
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,complex, ordinarily they are evident both to us and those we love
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the best. Anything, as we all learn by experience, which accelerates
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the activity of the mind and increases the congestion of the brain
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,is likely to induce insomnia. Worry, fear, grief, prolonged mental
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,effort, any sort of emotional excitement, social dissipation, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,intemperate use of coffee, tea, or alcohol are among the most familiar
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,causes of insomnia. Disturbances of digestion, neuralgic pains,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,arterial disease, eye-strain, and dental lesions are the hidden causes,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,oftener than we imagine, of protracted wakefulness.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Many of the more obstinate cases of insomnia are due, we know at
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,last through Dr. Upson’s remarkable book,[6] to some dental lesion
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,unsuspected because, as is not uncommon, it is unaccompanied by the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ache habitually associated with all the ills to which the teeth are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,heirs. In my Emmanuel clinic I have had one case of insomnia which, in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,spite of all an efficient doctor could do for the body and the Emmanuel
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,worker for the mind, persisted until I at last discovered that the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sufferer was in immediate need of a dentist, whose threshold, through a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,morbid fear, he had not crossed in many years.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[6] _Insomnia and Nerve Strain_, 12.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE VALUE OF DRUGS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,For insomnia there is no specific known to medicine. While the good
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,family doctor may correct digestive disturbances, banish for the time
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,neuralgic pains, modify arterial disease, relieve with the oculist’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,assistance eye-strain, and through the dentist remove the cause of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,dental lesions, sometimes insomnia persists long after the physical
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cause has disappeared. I have had in my clinic one case of chronic
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleeplessness caused by a headache which appeared incurable though the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cause of the headache and insomnia alike had vanished years before.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Drugs which induce sleep induce it merely for the time. Doctor Caillé
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in his large experience has found morphia invaluable for the inhibiting
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of pain or of severe dyspnœa, chloral and the bromides useful in cases
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of visceral neuralgia, codein and urethan in arteriosclerosis, and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in pulmonary tuberculosis, where beer and porter failed to bring the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,longed-for sleep, dionin, trional, and hyoscin. But in ordinary cases
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of insomnia, where the cause is evidently more psychical than physical,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,he is inclined to turn rather to suggestion in one form or another.[7]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Drugs are sure to make a difference in the morning. The dulness and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,depression which they leave behind, in spite of all the claims of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,those who put on the market their proprietary hypnotics, offset to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,some extent the artificial sleep they have the night before produced.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Sometimes they fill the mind for days with morbid fancies and with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,dangerous obsessions. Dr. J. Madison Taylor describes in some detail
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the case of a lunatic under his care who developed homicidal tendencies
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,as a consequence of the administration of large doses of bromide, and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,who lost the same the moment the bromide was withdrawn from him.[8] On
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,credible authority I am informed that there is among the alienists a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,growing disposition, on this account, to give no drugs at all to induce
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep in patients in the higher class of hospitals for the insane.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Morphia is not only no specific; it sometimes causes both a mental and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,a physical depression worse than the insomnia it would relieve. In my
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,clinic I have one woman from whom morphia, administered to relieve
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,acute pain, took away the power to sleep at all, and for years she
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,stoically bore her pain rather than resort to morphia, until last
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,winter she found in the Emmanuel treatment immediate and unfailing
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,relief from pain, followed by sound sleep, which has only at rare
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,intervals been interrupted in months past.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Powerful as chloral is and useful in the thoughtful doctor’s hands
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in various emergencies, especially in fevers where there is cerebral
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,excitement, it is a depressant, and he who contracts the chloral
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,habit invariably wishes at the last that he had waited for damnation
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,till after he was dead. Sulphonal, trional, veronal, paraldehyde, and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,those proprietary hypnotics whose composition is withheld from the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,public appear to be least harmful of all sleeping drugs. But they all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,inebriate or stupefy the fragile cells of the brain, none too solid in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the best of us; and in the psychically weak or emotionally excitable
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,they may even put the delicately constructed thinking organ altogether
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,out of commission.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[7] _Differential Diagnosis and Treatment of Disease_, 78, 355, 361,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,457, 731.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[8] _Popular Science Monthly_, September, 1905.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE REMOVAL OF ALL PHYSICAL CAUSES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Though there may be no specific for insomnia in the drug store, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,complaint can often be relieved when the cause is wholly physical by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,striking at its root. If the general practitioner fails to relieve
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,disturbances of the digestion, the stomach specialist should be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,consulted. One of my patients, who had for two years suffered both
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,from insomnia and other troubles which had exhausted the ingenuity
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and the resources of the local doctors he consulted, began to improve
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,as soon as a stomach specialist of national repute to whom I sent him
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,discovered by chemical analysis of the contents of his stomach an
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,incredibly excessive acidity, for which the proper prescription and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,diet were at once suggested.[9]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,In cases where insomnia is evidently due to some physical ailment
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,which cannot be at once located, a visit to the oculist, the dentist,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and even the throat and nose specialist should as a matter of course
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,be paid even if the patient has no conscious need of them. In at least
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,two instances which have come under my observation, the insomnia
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,disappeared after proper treatment of the eyes and teeth and throat,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,though two general practitioners had suspected nothing wrong in one
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,case with the eyes, and in the other a visit to the throat specialist
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,was never once suggested by the doctor who sent the case to me for the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Emmanuel treatment.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[9] As the proof comes, the patient in question writes me that his
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia was of the fitful type. He had so much trouble in going to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep promptly that he formed the habit of sitting up late and inducing
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the sleep mood by reading. Since his treatment ended, he writes me
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,(Sept. 12th), “This summer I have retired at nine o’clock with few
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,exceptions, gone to sleep immediately, and risen at half past six in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the morning thoroughly refreshed.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,GENERAL DIRECTIONS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,In many cases no local ailment would appear to be responsible for the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia, and yet in every instance attention must be given to the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,body’s entire needs. The habit of deep breathing from the diaphragm
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,must be developed and be regularly practised both indoors and out. This
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,alone sufficed in one complicated case to bring sleep every night.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The diet must be carefully chosen and followed in the face of every
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,importunity of a silly and capricious appetite. Tea and coffee, save
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,at the morning meal, must be in almost every case eliminated from the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,menu. Constipation, which is responsible far oftener than we think for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleeplessness, must be, whenever possible, at once corrected without
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,resort to purgatives and enemas.[10] The hot bath sometimes brings
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep by relieving the congestion of the brain, but contraction of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,blood-vessels often follows with such promptness that the hot-water
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,bottle applied to the feet or the back of the neck or both is likely to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,be of more service.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,If running up and down stairs or exercise in that wood-pile now
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,imaginary in the average home leaves the sufferer as wide awake as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ever, Doctor J. B. Learned’s provision for taking exercise in bed
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,without displacement of the covering will sometimes relieve both the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cerebral congestion and the psychical exhilaration and let the wakeful
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,one drop off to sleep at the drowsy moment, which is apt to pass if
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the exercise is taken out of bed and even scanty preparations have in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,consequence to be made for retiring.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[10] See Dubois’s _Psychical Treatment of Nervous Disorders_, ch.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,xxiii, for the drugless cure of constipation.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,SECONDARY AIDS TO SLEEP
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,When the sleeplessness is due to mental strain alone the cure can be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,effected through the quiet mind. This is, I know, not always easy to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,obtain. Conditions do not always favour it. Economic pressure does not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,disappear at will with prices rising and with factories operating on
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,half-time. When the heart aches for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,          the touch of a vanish’d hand,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    And the sound of a voice that is still,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,grief is scarcely to be put away without some seeming hurt to the best
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in us. For many a subject to insomnia the most that can apparently
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,be done is to stand cheerfully and confidently between him and the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,temptation to grow morbid and melancholy, to keep the house as quiet as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,circumstances will allow, to provide for the bedtime hour a glass of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,hot milk with its pinch of salt in it, the hot malted milk unsweetened,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the clam bouillon, the beef extract, or a cup of cocoa which every
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomniast should take before he goes to bed, and by day and night to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,soothe, sustain, and cheer the troubled spirit.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,DR. LEARNED’S PLAN
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The physiological problem is uncomplicated. As Dr. Learned, who more
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,than a quarter of a century ago cured himself of habitual insomnia by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,getting control of the respiratory and circulatory functions in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleeping posture, has made clear, the problem is simply to shift the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,belt of attention from the wildly whirling wheel of introspection to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the steadier wheel the will revolves.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,By deep regular respirations, accompanied by rhythmical movements of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the head and hands and feet, Dr. Learned has frequently brought the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,wandering attention back from some side track it sought in fitfulness
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to the main line of the controlled consciousness. So surely has he in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,recent years become convinced that the problem is usually psychical
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,that he no longer emphasises physical exercises in or out of bed.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Instead he provides an ingenious little tablet on which the wakeful one
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with unlifted pencil steadily records in waving lines his inhalations
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and his exhalations until at last, fatigued by the long exercise, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,brain becomes anæmic and sleep overtakes the drowsy mind.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,RELAXATION AND RHYTHMIC BREATHING
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,To Mrs. Annie Payson Call[11] and Dr. Emily Noble we owe of late the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,stress we lay on muscular relaxation and rhythmic breathing, which
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,practised faithfully will now and then bring sleep where drugs are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,worse than useless. Muscular relaxation can be learned by any who
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,will take the trouble. The Delsarteans are already adepts at it. The
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,letting of the arms drop limp by the side as one sits in an easy chair,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the letting of the trunk sink unsupported against the easy chair as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,though it were sinking into a yielding bank of snow, the letting of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the head fall forward or sideways without resistance will furnish even
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to the slow of wits a visual image which will serve as a sufficient
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,pattern in the relaxation of the whole body.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Dr. Emily Noble, who has seen Oriental soldiers at the end of a long
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,march throw themselves in complete relaxation on their backs, gives in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,her _Rhythmic Breathing plus Olfactory Nerve Influence on Respiration_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,possibly the most practical of all directions for the mature in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,important art of relaxation. She bids him lie upon his back on a hard
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,surface, with head turned to one side in order to relieve the tension
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,on the muscles of the neck, with arms extended at right angles, with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the palms turned up, with feet turned out and spread for comfort at
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,least a foot apart.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The lungs are then to be cleared of their static air by a few deep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,inhalations, made through the left nostril because in the average man
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,it seems to furnish a freer channel for the air than the right nostril.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Next the insomniast settles down to lighter rhythmic breathing, which
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,is nothing but the consequence of the conscious effort to make each
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,exhalation equal to each inhalation. He should take the “breath in as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,gently as the fog creeps in from the sea.” He should let it out “as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the air goes out of little children’s balloons when it is allowed to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,escape.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,As with experience all feeling of conscious effort passes, he will have
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,a sense of letting go, the muscles will of their own accord relax, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,quiet mind will come, especially if a pleasant thought be held steadily
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,before it, the insomniast will stretch and yawn, take instinctively if
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,he be in bed the sleep position, and pass off into a dreamless sleep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,which will indeed knit up “the ravell’d sleave of care,” and make him
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ready for a day of effective thinking and efficient action.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[11] _The Heart of Good Health._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE EMMANUEL METHOD
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,When sleeplessness can be directly traced to mental causes, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Emmanuel treatment, if experiments made both in Boston and Northampton
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,are to be trusted, is as surely a specific as quinine for malaria. If
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in any instance medical diagnosis can find no physical reason for the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleeplessness, Emmanuel treatment is at once in order.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The sufferer is admitted to the Rector’s study. The very atmosphere
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,encourages frank speaking. Concealment of any fact or circumstance
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,which bears upon the case is prejudicial to improvement. I have once
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,after three treatments refused again to see a patient who had failed
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to give me her whole confidence, until she was willing to speak out
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with greater freedom. The physical habits are invariably considered and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,corrected whenever there is need. Deep breathing is prescribed. Dr.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Learned’s method is sometimes suggested, and always Dr. Noble’s. Drugs
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,are from the first withheld. Tea, coffee, and all other stimulants
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,which act directly on the brain are banished from the evening meal. The
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sufferer is encouraged as the bedtime hour draws near to give himself
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to such interests as scatter the cares and worries and obsessions which
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,are then wont to gather like a cloud around the patient’s head.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,For some a social evening is suggested, provided it be not too
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,exciting. For others the theatre, the symphony, or other form of public
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,entertainment serves the same purpose. For perhaps a larger number,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,especially the preacher, or the teacher, or the literary worker, a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,magazine, a novel with no miserable modern problem in it, or a standard
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,history will in a half-hour let down the mind to the sleep level. I
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,know one man who found Parkman’s histories a soporific boon; another
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,whom Green’s longer _History of the English People_ led on each night
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to wholesome sleep; another, the head of a large sanitarium, who
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sometimes saves himself from sleeplessness by reading after he has gone
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to bed as dull a book as he can find, and recommends the same plan with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,some profit to his patients.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FAITH REQUIRED IN GOD AND MAN
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The main reliance, however, in the Emmanuel treatment is on faith,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,reinforced first by hetero-suggestion and then by patient and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,persistent auto-suggestion. The man who would be permanently free
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,from insomnia must be an optimist. He must have a philosophy of life
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,wholesome enough to keep him buoyant, cheerful, and serene amid all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the changes and the chances of this mortal life. With the Persian
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,he may hold that “He’s a Good Fellow, and ’twill all be well;” with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Socrates that “To the good man no evil thing can happen;” or with St.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Paul that “All things work together for good to them that love the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Lord.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Whatever language he may use in the formulation of his life philosophy,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,he must believe with all his heart and soul that life in spite of all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,appearances is worth living, that there is love and goodness at the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,heart of things, that the word God, whatever be its content, does
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,stand for a concept indispensable in our everyday existence, and that
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,there is somewhere, everywhere, One who, by a paradox as strange as it
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,is true, is both the centre and circumference of all that has been,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,is, and ever is to be—The Absolute and Unconditioned wherever we
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,may chance to be in time or space. “If I climb up into heaven, Thou
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,art there: if I go down to hell, Thou art there also. If I take the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,wings of the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea;
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,even there also shall Thy hand lead me: and Thy right hand shall hold
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,me.”[12]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,A man who wants that serenity of mind on which the soundest sleep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,invariably depends must get right and keep right with God, whether he
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,defines Him in the terms of Persia, Greece, or Christianity.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,But this is not enough. A man must be right also with his fellow-men.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,He must love his neighbour as he loves his God. “He that loveth not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,seen?” He must have more than a languid interest in his brother. He
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,must wish him better than well. He must have done forever with sharp
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,practice, hard bargaining, ungracious criticism, and that subtle
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,disloyalty which often through sheer cowardice stands mute while
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,slander wags its tongue or envy shoots its Parthian arrows back as it
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,retreats.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,With the spirit’s eye he must see even in the poorest and the meanest
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of his fellows some charm which others have not found. He must with the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Christ insight pierce to the heart of the roughest boulder that was
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ever hewn from the hard mountain-side of seamy human nature and let
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,loose the imbedded angel always there and always struggling to be free.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,No man has any right to sleep, in fact to any of God’s better gifts,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,who goes through life with slanting eye and lowering brow sullenly
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,protesting to himself:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    As I walked by myself,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    I talked to myself,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    And thus myself did say to me:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    Look to thyself,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    And take care of thyself,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    For nobody cares for thee.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[12] Psalm cxxxix., 7-9.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE SPECIFIC TREATMENT
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,When the insomniast is ready to pay this double price of love to God
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and love to man for the peace that passeth understanding and that also
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,bringeth sleep, he is ready for Emmanuel treatment. Seated in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Morris chair before the smouldering fire with curtains drawn, he is
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,taught to relax his muscles, the cortical layer of the brain is quieted
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,by soothing suggestions, and then standing behind the chair the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Emmanuel worker begins the treatment somewhat thus in a low monotone:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,You are now relaxed in body and quieted in mind. You are to let your
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,thoughts languidly follow mine expressed in words. Do not offer any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,mental opposition. I shall say nothing which your mind will not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,instinctively accept and cherish.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Fix your thoughts on God. Think of Him not alone as the All-Father but
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,also as the Universal Mind in which your mind exists exactly as each
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,individual thought floats in your mind. Think of Him not merely as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,your Heavenly Father but also as the Universal Spirit on which your
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,soul depends for every breath of spiritual life, just as your body is
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,dependent for its every breath of physical existence on the air you
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,breathe. Believe that in this larger, higher, truer sense, “In Him we
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,live and move and have our being.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Now Universal Mind or Universal Spirit is wholesomeness and love,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,harmony and power. Realise that when your soul breathes in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,atmosphere in which it lives it breathes in wholesomeness and love,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,harmony and power. But it is possible, in the exercise of the free will
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with which you are in the nature of the case endowed, to fill up the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,soul with morbidness and selfishness, disunity and weakness, so that
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,there is no room in it for God’s wholesomeness and love, His harmony
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and power.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    If thou couldst empty all thyself of self,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    Like to a shell dishabited,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    Then might He find thee on the Ocean shelf,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    And say, “This is not dead,”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    And fill thee with Himself instead.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    But thou art all replete with very _Thou_,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    And hast such shrewd activity,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    That, when He comes, He says: “This is enow
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    Unto itself—’t were better let it be:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    It is so small and full, there is no room for Me.”[13]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,You do not sleep because you are “all replete with very _Thou_.” You
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,have filled up your soul with thoughts of self, or thoughts of others
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,from the point of view of self. You have worried when you should have
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cast your care on Him; “for He careth for you.” You have yielded to all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sorts of foolish fears, forgetful that “perfect love casteth out fear.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,You have been self-centred, though God Himself was so far centred out
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of self that “He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,In the silence of this quiet hour put your worries and your fears away
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and swing your centre out of self. Open wide the windows of your soul
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and let the Spirit in of wholesomeness and love, of harmony and power.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Believe the Spirit will come in. Interpret in the terms of Spirit those
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,veracious words of Revelation: “Behold, I stand at the door, and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,him, and will sup with him, and he with me.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Wait for the incoming Spirit. Wait in faith and confidence. Remember
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,that “They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary;
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,they shall walk, and not faint.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,With your mind filled with the Spirit of wholesomeness and love, of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,harmony and power, it will be at rest; it will know the peace that
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,passeth understanding. All nerve-strain will go. Sleep will come
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to-night. Sleep will come to-morrow night. Sleep will come every
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,night. Sound sleep, re-creating sleep so long denied you, will be yours
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,at last. The day will never know again its feverish inquietude. Work
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,will have its zest, and play its joy. The silent night will lose its
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,morbid fancies and its horrid nightmares, and you will each morning
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,wake with the song upon your lips:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    The dark hath many dear avails:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    The dark distils divinest dews;
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    The dark is rich with nightingales,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    With dreams, and with the heavenly muse.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,You have done with sleeplessness forever. You go out from this room
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,beneath the rooftree of God’s sanctuary, a new creature in Christ
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Jesus. Claim your new privilege in Jesus’ name. Act henceforth on the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,comforting assurance that you are to go to sleep as soon as you have
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,gone to bed, and sleep the whole night through.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Keep by day as well as night the serenity you here have found. Awake
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with the morning light into the thoughts of this first treatment. Keep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,them in the background of your consciousness the whole day through.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Take a few minutes every day to go into the silence as you now are,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and think these thoughts again in proper sequence. Take them up into
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,your heart and brood upon them all the day. Work them into the warp
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and woof of your inmost soul so that “neither death, nor life, nor
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature” shall be able
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to separate you from them. Make them yours and keep them yours forever
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and forever. And you shall sleep the sleep of the quiet mind and the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,God-filled soul in all the years to come.[14]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[13] Thomas E. Brown.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[14] Subsequent treatments are usually a logical development of this.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,See also Henry Wood’s _New Thought Simplified_. In the author’s next
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,volume to appear in 1909, he expects to publish a complete series of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,suggestive treatments for nervous functional disorders.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,SOME IMMEDIATE RESULTS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Again and again one treatment of this sort—faith reinforced by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,reiterated suggestion—has sufficed to break up the most obstinate
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia. One man on the verge of suicide from hitherto incurable
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia went home from this first treatment to sleep soundly for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,several nights thereafter. Another man on whom a heart-breaking
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,disappointment had swept down without a word of warning went home
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to sleep eight hours and a half for the first time in many nights. A
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,trained nurse so long on night duty that she had slipped her sleep cog
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to the demoralisation of her entire nervous system slept normally again
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,after but one visit to me.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,A college instructor sleepless on the verge of a new year of academic
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,strain thus secured the long night’s sleep she coveted the day before
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the opening of college. A wife and mother overwhelmed by a domestic
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,tragedy after six weeks of drugged sleep went home from her first
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,treatment with a shining face to sleep ever after without taking any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,drugs. A college girl worn sleepless by the heat and burden of earning
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,her own living while she kept up her standing in the college, reported
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,marked improvement after her first treatment. And a neurasthenic who
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,had lost all hope of ever sleeping better slept so much better after
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,a single treatment that she insists in spite of all my protests in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,placing her experience among the modern miracles.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE CO-OPERATION OF THE PATIENT
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,In most cases, of course, more is necessary than one treatment.[15]
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Sometimes a dozen treatments are required. And at every stage the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,patient’s close co-operation is of utmost consequence. In fact, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cure can never be effected without it. To faith reinforced by the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Emmanuel worker’s suggestions must be added the auto-suggestions of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,patient. He must will to keep the loving attitude toward God and man.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,He must cease to worry about sleep. He must never mention his symptoms
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to anyone except the Emmanuel worker who is treating him.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,He must cultivate a heavenly unconcern about himself. He must keep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,saying to himself the whole day through: It does not matter anyway. If
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,I sleep, well and good. If I do not sleep I will not worry over it. To
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,lie awake at night is not so terrible as I once thought. Bed is for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,rest as well as sleep. The worry over lack of sleep hurts more than
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleeplessness itself. Rest is possible even when I can not sleep. Happy
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,thoughts will rob the darkness of its gloom and minimise nerve-strain.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,If I keep still in my normal sleep position eight hours every night
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in bed, if I relax every muscle and let it stay relaxed; if I breathe
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,lightly, regularly, rhythmically in a well-ventilated room, making
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sure the early morning light will not strike across my face and wake
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,me up; if I simulate sleep in every way I can; if I shut out all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,preoccupation, expect each night to go to sleep, and steadily hour
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,after hour suggest sleep to myself in words like these I shall surely
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,go to sleep:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,I am going to sleep. I shall not lie awake. I cannot lie awake. I am
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,going to sleep. The tired eyes are closing. The blood is flowing from
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,my brain to my extremities. There is no longer any pressure on the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,brain. The muscles are relaxing. Sleep is stealing over all my senses.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,They are growing numb. I am getting drowsy, drowsy. I am softly
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sinking into sleep, dreamless sleep. I am sinking deeper, deeper,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,deeper. I am almost asleep. I am asleep, asleep, asleep. I am asleep.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,FOOTNOTES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,[15] It is perhaps unnecessary to explain that no charge is ever made
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,for the Emmanuel treatment, though grateful patients sometimes make a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,thank offering to the church of which the Emmanuel worker is the Rector.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE ULTIMATE EFFECT
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Even if, in spite of this, one sometimes fails to sleep, one will at
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,least be free from the nerve-strain which a night of worry about sleep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,invariably brings. And if, in the face of every discouragement and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,every temptation to lapse from this wholesome attitude toward sleep,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,one habitually practises each night some such auto-suggestions, he has
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,forever turned his face away from chronic sleeplessness.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,He may not always sleep at will. He may not always live up to the light
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,vouchsafed to him. But he will sleep much better than he slept before.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,He will be free from the morbidness and worry of insomnia. He will have
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,faith where he had fear, peace where he had the troubled mind, and the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,light at eventide of a night which is not dark with griefs and graves.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,More than this, he will sleep. He will sleep habitually—to his body’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,health, his mind’s contentment, and his soul’s supreme delight.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ILLUSTRATIVE CASES
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,I. CURED BY SUGGESTION ALONE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_A.—Waking Suggestion_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1. The Emmanuel Clinic in Boston reports the case of a distinguished
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,lawyer who after nine months of insomnia came to Emmanuel Church for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,counsel. He was on the verge of a nervous breakdown. His habit was to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,take his work and worries every night to bed with him. He was advised
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to submit to the rest cure under a good neurologist. He replied that,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with important cases coming up at once for trial, rest was impossible.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,In fact, he could at most spend a few hours in Boston. The causes of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia were then explained to him. Suggestions were given looking
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,toward self-help. The importance of cheerful and uplifting thoughts was
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,emphasised. He went away an hour later to report in a few weeks that he
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,was entirely cured and had not felt so well since he was a boy.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,2. Dubois (p. 340) speaks of a physician twenty-three years of age who
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,had suffered for nine months from persistent insomnia. By bromides,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,bathing, travel, and the cessation of all work, he had obtained only
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,transient results. Dubois drew his attention to the psychic causes of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia, counselled the immediate abandonment both of the treatment he
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,had been giving himself and of all apprehension of insomnia. In a few
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,days sleep returned, the convalescent resumed his customary duties, and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,was soon completely well again.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_B.—Profound Suggestion_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Forel (p. 252) describes the case of a working-girl who suffered for a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,year and a half from extreme sleeplessness. All means for her relief
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,failed. Forel induced profound suggestion, let her sleep about an hour
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,every day while she was still in his clinic room, and after three weeks
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,discharged her completely cured and able regularly to sleep nine hours
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,out of every twenty-four.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,2. CURED BY FAITH REINFORCED BY SUGGESTION
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_A.—Inability to go to sleep on going to bed_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,A clergyman forty years of age had inherited a tendency to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleeplessness. Even as a child it was not uncommon for him to lie awake
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,an hour or two after getting into bed. As he passed into his teens
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the presence of his brother or a boy friend in the same bed would
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,invariably keep him wide awake the whole night through. At college the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,unusual strain of extra work or of examinations was likely to drive
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep entirely away, and only with the help of bromides at special
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,seasons was he able to get through his studies and take his place at
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,last among the honour men.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,His first years out of college were spent in graduate study and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,educational work, and were made miserable by the gradual increase of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insomnia, which shut him out of many social pleasures and impaired his
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,efficiency.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,His first ten years in the ministry were checkered by so many stubborn
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,attacks of insomnia that he was more than once on the verge of a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,complete breakdown, from which the drugs the doctors gave him furnished
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,only temporary relief.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Two years ago, after six weeks of sleeplessness during which he had
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,at his doctor’s orders taken a hypnotic every night, he was able to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep at most three hours out of every twenty-four and was haunted by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,obsessions and pervasive fears. When even morphia failed to induce
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,anything more than extreme drowsiness and the heart’s action was so
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,weak that strychnine was prescribed to make it function properly, one
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleepless night a physician peremptorily bade him keep in the sleep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,position and never move, breathe regularly, keep his eyes closed as in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep, and in every way imaginable to simulate sleep.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,This proved to be the turning point in his experience. Sleep came night
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,after night in consequence of his unvarying obedience to the doctor’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,orders. From one source or another he discovered how to relax and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to suggest sleep to himself. Within a month he had learned to sleep
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,at will, and only once in two years, when for some weeks there was
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,continuous local pain, has his sleep been interrupted. The average both
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of physical and of mental health has been at least doubled, and these
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,two years past he has done, without fatigue of mind or body, at least
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,twice as much work as in any two years of his life before.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_B.—Waking in the middle of the night_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,A widow, seventy-three years of age, suffering for twelve years from
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,neurasthenia, was apt to wake about the middle of every night and to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,go to sleep no more. The loss of sleep was bad enough, but the morbid
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,fancies which invariably came in swarms sometimes all but drove her to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,distraction. There was such a bad family history as to sleep and such
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,poor circulation with its inevitable cold feet, that the physician
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,gave me little hope of relieving her insomnia. During the first month
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of her treatment I, therefore, confined myself almost entirely to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the upbuilding of her faith by a course of optimistic reading and by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,suggestion. I seldom spoke about her sleeplessness at all. To her
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,surprise and mine in a few weeks her sleep began to improve. At the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,end of two months, though she still awoke two or three nights every
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,week, no morbid fancies came. She filled up her mind with wholesome
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,thoughts, repeated again and again the auto-suggestions on page 68,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and usually awoke almost as much refreshed as though she had slept the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,whole night through. Now after almost a year she reports what used to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,be one bad night out of every four or five, but as compared with the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,bad nights—four or five a week—of former years it were better called,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,she thinks, a good night than a bad one.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_C.—Waking early in the morning_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1. A college girl of unusual ability and character had practically
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,all her life been inclined to wake at two or three o’clock in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,morning and often go to sleep no more; or if she went to sleep, to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep badly and be subject to hideous dreams and horrible nightmares.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,After one treatment, June 15th, she began at once to sleep much better.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Though she sometimes woke as formerly at two or three, she at once by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,relaxation and auto-suggestion usually went off to sleep again and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,suffered little from dreams and nightmares. She has had two treatments
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,since, and is not only much improved in body but is happier and more
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,serene in mind.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,2. The Emmanuel Clinic in Boston reports the case of an unmarried
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,woman, fifty-two years old, who usually slept four hours a night,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,awaking at 2.30 and never sleeping more. Her treatment was begun June
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,20, 1907, and was followed by immediate improvement. By July 1, 1907,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,she was sleeping without waking eight hours every night, and reported
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,August, 1908, that the improvement had become permanent.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_D.—Semi-sleep_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1. A college girl had never had the feeling of being sound asleep. She
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,thought she was half conscious the night through. What sleep she got
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,never seemed to refresh her. She came to me for treatment, February 7,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1908, slept somewhat better for a night or two, and came back, February
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,14th, 18th, 25th, for other treatments. On March 13th she reported
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,that though she was not completely cured she was sleeping more soundly
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and felt better in every way. There was in this case the unhappy
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,complication of organic heart trouble.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,2. To the Emmanuel Clinic in Boston came, January 2, 1908, a clergyman
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,forty-nine years old who reported that for years he had never slept,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,but merely dozed. He gave up preaching in 1903; then resumed it only to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,abandon it again in April, 1907. After treatment from January 2nd to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,March 9th he was discharged, much improved, and on May 4th he reported
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,that he was still improving, and is now sleeping well from six and a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,half to seven hours every night.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_E.—Insomnia from psychical shock_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,A woman thirty-four years old was plunged into insomnia six years ago
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,by the psychical shock which followed a violent attack made on her by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,an insane woman. Her habit afterwards was to lie awake for three or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,four hours after retiring, and then to sleep about two hours every
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,night. Whenever she lay down to sleep, whether her eyes were open or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,closed, she felt herself surrounded by people, some of whom had been
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,dead for several years, and one of whom she fancied wished to kill
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,her. To the hallucinations dizziness was often added. Bromides which
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,she had long been taking began at last to lose their effect. Treatment
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of her was begun at the Emmanuel Clinic in Boston on February 25,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1908. By March 10th she was sleeping better, though not soundly, and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,for thirteen nights the hallucinations had been absent. April 8th
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,she reported that the visions still came now and then but were fewer
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and less terrifying. By May 21st the dizziness had disappeared, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,hallucinations had not come for several weeks, her mind was clear, her
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep was much improved, and she was sure that she was getting well.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_F.—Insomnia from family trouble_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,A mother forty-one years of age had suffered several family
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,bereavements. Her children had been sick more than is common. Her
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,brother had been burned to death. She herself had undergone a surgical
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,operation. For seven years she had suffered from insomnia, never even
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,temporarily relieved except by taking sulphonal, trional, etc. It
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,seemed to be the fear of sleeplessness that usually kept her from her
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,sleep. Under treatment at the Emmanuel Clinic in Boston from September
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,21, 1907, to January 27, 1908, she steadily improved, and is now in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,every way much better.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                                THE END
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                         _A Selection from the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                             Catalogue of_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                       Complete Catalogues sent
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                            on application
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,              _A marshalling of the evidence pro and con.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                A summing up and an impartial judgment_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                           Christian Science
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                       The Faith and Its Founder
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                        By Rev. Lyman P. Powell
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,               _Crown 8vo. $1.25 net. Postage, 10 cents_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“I sat up one night reading this book as one reads a novel, which
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in the popular phrase, “cannot be put down.” I have rarely read so
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,interesting a volume of any kind. It is scientific, accurate, clear,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cogent, unanswerable, and satisfying to the last degree. I am delighted
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with it. The whole Christian world will thank you for it. I am going to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,use it unblushingly in a course of sermons later on.”—_Cyrus Townsend
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Brady._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“A volume which is not the less destructive for its moderation, and its
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,fairness. Mr. Powell’s discussion of his subject is sane, temperate,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and judicious, and his book merits the careful attention of all who are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,interested either from within or without in the all-important subject
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of Christian Science.”—_Springfield Republican._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“A fine piece of work.... I can but feel that in your book you have
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,a little of the swing of Carlyle and the trust of Newman. I cannot,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,for the life of me, see what you have left for anyone else to say on
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the subject.”—_Rev. Nathaniel S. Thomas, Church of the Holy Apostles,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Philadelphia._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_Send for descriptive circular_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                         NEW YORK      LONDON
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,_“A unique little volume, one which deserves the thoughtful
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,consideration of every practitioner.”—Sajou’s Monthly Cyclopedia and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Medical Bulletin, Philadelphia._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                       Insomnia and Nerve Strain
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                        By Henry F. Upson, M.D.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    Professor of Diseases of the Nervous System in Western Reserve
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,University, Attending Neurologist at the Lakeside Hospital, Cleveland,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                                 Ohio
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,         _Crown 8vo. With Skiagraphic Illustrations $1.50 net_
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,"An interesting theory in explanation of many cases of insomnia and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,insanity is brought forth and illustrated by Dr. Henry S. Upson of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Cleveland, in his book on ‘Insomnia and Nerve Strain.’ Dr. Upson
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,believes that very many cases of mania, melancholia, and dementia are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,caused by defective teeth.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“The work is technical, and for the profession rather than the lay
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,reader. It will doubtless prove of great value as a contribution to the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,warfare being waged against the mental scourges that fill our asylums
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with young people on the threshold of productive activity.”—_Cleveland
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Plain Dealer._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“Dr. Upson is, we believe, the first medical practitioner to write
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,extensively on this topic and the first to accompany his writing with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,skiagraphs relating to his cases. His enthusiasm in this matter may be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the means of arousing a greater interest in it than hitherto has been
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,manifested by physicians.”—_New York Times._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“The author has presented his conceptions in a most attractive and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,entertaining manner and time alone will say whether his deductions will
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,rest on true scientific ground. The treatment of insomnia if carried
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,out along the lines suggested will not only benefit a great number of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,distressing conditions but will undoubtedly curtail the indiscriminate
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,use of hypnotics at present prevailing.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,“The closing chapter by Lodge on the technic of dental skiagraphy
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,will prove valuable to many engaged in this branch of practice.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The excellence of the reproductions is a pleasing feature of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,work.”—_Cleveland Medical Journal._
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                          G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,                         NEW YORK      LONDON
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,End of Project Gutenberg's The Art of Natural Sleep, by Lyman P. Powell
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF NATURAL SLEEP ***
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,be renamed.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,States without permission and without paying copyright
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,license, especially commercial redistribution.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,START: FULL LICENSE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,www.gutenberg.org/license.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic works
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,you share it without charge with others.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,country other than the United States.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,  
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,beginning of this work.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ License.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,provided that:
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        Literary Archive Foundation.”
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        works.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        receipt of the work.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,    
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,forth in Section 3 below.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,cannot be read by your equipment.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,DAMAGE.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,without further opportunities to fix the problem.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,remaining provisions.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Defect you cause.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,from people in all walks of life.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Literary Archive Foundation
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,public support and donations to carry out its mission of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,status with the IRS.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,approach us with offers to donate.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,volunteer support.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,edition.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,facility: www.gutenberg.org.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,
the-art-of-natural-sleep,1866,powell-lyman,